[Music]
hello everybody my name is
ram and welcome to my php course this
course is
full for absolute beginners the only
prerequisite for this course is html
in this course we're going to learn all
the basic things php developer needs
we're going to learn how to set up
working environment how to work with
variables loops how to write eval
statements how to write functions how to
work with
dates file system how to work with
sessions and cookies
and many other minor things but more
importantly we're going to build a
product squad application
and we're going to build that
application three times
first we're going to build like a very
beginner would build
and we basically don't pay attention how
well we write the code
so we will have code repetition and very
unoptimal code
but the main thing is to build that
application which will be working
and we're going to achieve that goal and
we're going to also learn a lot of
things by
making our mistakes and then fixing
these mistakes
after this we're going to change our
code and make it more
optimal we're going to create reusable
files reusable
piece of code and then the second
version will be
much better than the previous one and
while building this product squad
application we're going to learn how to
validate the form
how to work with file system how to
upload files how to work
with mysql database after this we're
gonna learn
modern tools like namespaces autoloading
and
composer and using that tools we're
gonna build a custom
mini mvc framework yes we're going to
have controllers
models and views and based on that
minimizing framework we're going to
rebuild
the product squad application third time
but in this case the approach how we
build will be completely different
and when we compare the latest version
of that product squared application to
the previous one
we're going to understand how much
difference is there and how well you can
write code in php
if you don't know me i'm the code holy
can i run my own youtube channel
where i upload videos about web
development coding tutorials and
challenges
all the source code which i write in
this video is available on my github
and you can find the link in the video
description before i start i want to say
huge
thanks to brad traversy for two main
reasons
inspiring me in many many things and
having me on his channel
when i started my own youtube channel
two years ago i couldn't even dream
about
creating content for traversing media
but today i'm here and i'm probably
the happiest man if you find that video
useful hit the like button if you're new
to traverse media hit the subscribe and
the bell notification button
and let's start first of all let's have
a look at the course
plan it's going to be several hours
course so we need some plain
so first of all i'm going to explain
what is php and why we should
learn it then we're going to download
and set up working
environment we're going to write hello
world
we're going to learn after that how to
write comments
how to declare variables and what data
types exist in php
after that we're going to learn some
numbers and string functions how to
declare
numbers how to declare strings and a
couple of functions working with that
then we're gonna learn how to work with
arrays
after that we're gonna write some
conditionals and see how we can declare
conditionals in php
after that we're gonna go to loops
functions
including files in php to include one
file into another
after that we're gonna see how to work
with file system how to create
directories delete directories
how to create and write inside the files
after that we're gonna have a look at
the object oriented programming in php
it's not going to be a full course about
object oriented programming
but it will be good starting point if
you are new to object-oriented
programming
so after that we're going to have a look
at the c url serial is absolutely
necessary tool for every developer to
communicate to other resources
through the internet so we're gonna
learn this
after this we're gonna have a project so
that's gonna be several hours project
it's not gonna be simple thing
so we're going to set up a product crud
application
so first of all we're going to create
that crowd application
with the easiest possible way just like
the any beginner would
do so we're going to make some mistakes
we're going to write an optimal code
we're gonna have code repetitions and so
on
but then we're gonna rewrite our code
and make it even better
and finally when we learn namespaces
and autoloading and composer in this
course we're going to come up to our
custom routing and we're going to create
a mini mvc framework and rewrite our
product squad application
based on that framework and we can see
how much difference
is in the code how structured the code
can be
when you come up to such structure like
the mvc for example
with custom routing and so on so
basically we're going to have
three versions of that product crowd
application bit version
where will be a lot of code duplications
and things like that
then the better version improved one and
the good one which will be based on that
custom routing and composer
okay during this project we're going to
learn how to validate the forms
how to upload files and more importantly
how to work with mysql
so and finally we're going to have a
look at the sessions and cookies
so how we're going to set the cookies
sessions and what are in general purpose
of
sessions and cookies okay let's start
and before we start actually we need to
have a look at the prerequisites so the
only required prerequisite
is html so you need to have a decent
knowledge of html to take the course
basic knowledge of programming is kind
of optional if you know how to write
loop how to write an if statement that
will be good it will help you a lot
but if you don't know i'm going to
explain these things also
in css it's kind of optional as well so
if you know html probably you have some
experience with css as well
but i'm not going to write much css
actually in this course so it will be
more focused on html and php
okay let's start with the main question
what is php php is
an open source general purpose scripting
language it is a recursive acronym so
the first p stands for php itself
h stands for hypertext ndp stands for
preprocessor
it's a server-side scripting language as
i mentioned and it's best
suited for web development so it's very
easy
it can be embedded into html and its
interpreted
language so let's have a look at the
reasons why we need to learn php
it's multi-purpose scripting language
meaning that we can build simple
websites on php as well as some complex
ones some crm systems some e-commerce
systems
rest apis we can even use php for
building
some image video and audio manipulation
software so it works fine with almost
all databases including known relational
databases as well
it's very easy to set up very easy to
learn it has a very large community
and on php there is written a lot of
very popular cmscs and frameworks
like the wordpress for example which is
written on php is the most popular
cms in the world out there so there are
many other
you know popular cms's on php such as
magento
drupal open card some of them are
e-commerce systems some of them
them are cms's some of them are both at
the same time
php frameworks so laravel itself is the
most
popular backend framework among all
other backend
frameworks out there even if it's django
or node.js frameworks so laravel
dominates in terms of
number of github stars so it's very very
popular one and very
very well written one so there are many
other
popular frameworks on php like symphony
codeigniter e2 framework all of them are
absolutely great
and one last but not the least reason
why you might need to learn php why you
should learn is that
there is quite high demand on job market
regarding php okay so
we should also mention that php is not
probably the best language for
uh building real-time chat applications
and artificial intelligence and machine
learning
so probably node.js will be the best one
for building some real-time applications
like
chat for example and python would be
probably
the best one not probably but it's the
best one out there
number one language for artificial
intelligence
and machine learning applications that's
all about slides now let's open fresh
installed windows 10
and set up working environment there
so here i have fresh new installed
windows 10. i just installed google
chrome nothing else
and we need to download necessary
software and installed on our operating
system
for this course i'm going to use
phpstorm for code editing
so i really recommend phpstorm but the
only disadvantage
of the php storm is that it's not free
you have to pay for it
as a free solution i suggest visual
studio code
but i'm going to download both of them
set up both of them so that
you know i don't know which one you
prefer so that you have a
guide for both of them so first of all
just type phpstorm
and open the download link and click
on that download button for your
operating system i have
already that downloaded so i'm not going
to click that button
so then let's open vs code
go to the download section and download
for your operating system
so just click that button if you are a
windows user and then we need to
download
xampp what is xampp xm is a package
which contains
apache mysql php and couple of other
things
we only need apache mysql and php in
this
course so we have to download that
let's download the latest version which
includes php 7.4
right here so i'm i'm gonna click
download button
and it will download the xampp so i also
have that downloaded so i'm not going to
click actually
but you have to download for your
operating system down below we have the
uh for linux exam for linux and we also
have for
mac os so just download for your os
right
here i have the downloaded exam php
store in vs code
and let's go ahead and install xampp
first so xampp as i mentioned is a
package that contains apache mysql and
php
apache is a web server which is
necessary to process php files
and send output to the browser we have
to answer a couple of things right here
on this screen so i'm gonna untick
tomcat mercury filezilla webalizer and
fake send mail i'm gonna leave all the
other things phpmyadmin is a web-based
client
to interact with mysql and we will need
this later in this course
so i'm going to click next installing
the default location
untick the checkbox next next and that's
it
so let's install now phpstorm so the
installation process is very simple we
just need to
double click and follow the wizard
so right here we have it so next next
right here i'm going to take the 64-bit
launcher
i'm going to add open folders project
which will add in the
windows context menu and
basically i'm going to leave everything
else right here click the next
install and let's also install visual
studio code so
double click on that so i accept
next next right here i'm going to create
the desktop icon
tick that checkboxes and tick that one
as well
and you have it
okay vs code is very lightweight open
source code editor you probably know
about that
and it's its installation process will
be very fast
and as a choice of editor i really
encourage you to use php store
if you do have enough money to purchase
that it's very intelligent ide
very uh like clever one and very complex
and flexible
as for the free choice vs code is quite
good
uh so we can use vs code just you have
to install a couple of extensions
to make it good enough to work in vs
code so i'm going to show you
as well which extensions one extension
basically which covers most of the
things
is necessary to install in vs code so
let's wait
until the installation is done and then
we can continue
so here vs code is already installed
let's click the finish
that opens up the vs code and
we have to install a couple of
extensions so
right here let's go to the extensions
and i'm going to search for
php intellifence okay
we need that extension php intellifence
which has 2.2 million downloads
that is extension which gives you most
of the features you need in php
like the autocompletion and code
formatting and so on
so just click the install button and
it's going to be installed
so i'm just going to work in vs code so
i'm just going to
close that and wait until the php storm
is done so it's done right here i'm
going to click the run phpstorm
click the finish and configure that
the example is also almost finished
so here both of them finish the
installation so let's
first open phpstorm i'm just going to
import anything click ok
so i'm going to choose the tarquilla
theme and skip remaining and set
defaults
so i'm going to evaluate this for free
which is 30 day free trial
so just click evaluate i do have an
educational license which generally i
use
but i'm just going to supply it right
here
okay and here we have this is the php
store so
i'm going to close this right now and
open later when we download the
source code files on which we need to
work and
let's open let's focus
on the example installation so this is
actually done
and finished so i'm gonna
start the control panel right here
and here we have so we have couple of
services right here but apache and mysql
are the only services which have that
button start button enabled
so if i just click the start button this
will start the apache
service running on port 80 and 443 both
of the ports are necessary
sometimes there are problems about these
ports and you just
if you have that problem you just need
to have a look at the log right here
probably it will
write some red text that the it couldn't
start and then you need to google find
out
it can be uh it can happen because of
multiple reasons so there's no single
uh answer on that okay and let's start
mysql as well
okay and the mysql starts on port 3306
now let's open browser and in the
browser
we're going to test if the installation
of apache
is running so i'm going to type
localhost in the browser hit the enter
and if we see welcome to xampp page this
is all what we need
so we have apache installed successfully
and it can process php files
let's also check if mysql is running so
i'm going to type localhost
slash phpmyadmin hit the enter
and we should be able to see the
web-based
client application to interact with
mysql
so here we have it now we need to make
php comment available from command
prompt
so if we just open right now comment
and type there php-v
this prints php is not recognized as an
internal or external comment okay to
make this working
we need to open the xampp installation
folder
go to the php folder and this is the
folder basically which contains the php
executable file
so if we scroll down right here we see
php
excel okay so we need to copy the
following path
and go to this pc right click
in properties go to advanced system
settings
environment variables click on path
and edit and right here we need to add
that php executable path
okay i'm going to paste this c drive xm
php
and click ok and right here we need to
also click
ok just the window is behind the taskbar
so i'm gonna click that using
keyboard okay click ok
right here close that
and let's just open right now
command prompt
and if we type php v this prints
php 7.4 so we will need that php comment
to be
available and we're going to use that
later
in this course i'm going to also show
you
how you can make your exam services
apache and mysql services
run as services okay so
let's go to the exam installation again
scroll down and find exam control access
so right now
i'm gonna close that actually i'm gonna
stop this
both of them and close the control panel
and i'm going to open the xom control
using right click
and run as administrator okay we have to
agree on this
and now it shows that red x is
next to apache in mysql okay because we
run this as an administrator we have
possibility to
enable the services and just click
on them
okay and the service is basically
basically installed
and if we go to the config and tick the
checkboxes right now
apache in mysql and click
save so this basically means that
whenever we restart
our machine apache and mysql will be
automatically
started okay so now i can start them
back
just we had it before and
here we have it now we need to download
the source files which we need to work
on
so let's go to the following link
github.com
the codeholic slash php
crash course 2020
so that is the repository
which we have to download on the master
branch we have the
uh initial files the uh which we need to
download and follow
and if you want to see the final files
you can found
these in the final version right here so
i'm going to click that code button and
download zip
right here so i'm going to open that
and i'm going to actually move these in
a specific folder
so let's go to the c drive xampp where
our example is
installed and htdocs okay and i'm gonna
paste this right here
so this htdocs folder corresponds to
localhost in the browser so let's type
localhost right here once again
and the local host basically corresponds
to the hd docs folder
so i'm going to extract this right now
right here
and i'm going to also just close this
i'm going to also rename this
and remove that master okay open that
and there's nested one more nesting
level so i'm gonna basically take out
everything
and put it right here and delete that
master empty folder now if i type
php crash course 2020
in the browser next to the localhost
right here
so let's do this we will see all the
files
which are inside that php crash course
2020 okay these are all the files
and from now on if we open one of the
php files from here
this will be processed by apache and it
will give us
output in the browser okay so now
let's open that folder
in the using the phpstorm and start
writing hello world so open folders php
store
let's wait a couple of seconds i'm going
to actually
minimize this let's move this on the
right side
i can't move this on the right side for
some reason
so phpstorm compared to vs code is
a little bit heavier so if you don't
have very good
working machine the vs code will
probably be better in terms of
performance
if you have a good machine good pc then
the difference between the vs code
and the php storm in terms of
performance is not that big
okay so i'm running this in a virtual
box so
that's why it's working slightly slow
let's open this and you have it
so on the right side we have the browser
on the left side we have the php storm
with all the source files we need okay
now
let's start introducing syntax of php
okay let's write hello world in php
first of all you probably noticed that
my php storm design is slightly
different from yours that's because i
have just
installed theme okay let's open
syntax html on the left side in the php
store
and we need to open the following file
in the
browser as well right here which prints
hello world
so in order to make the php working and
inject and embed in our html file
we have to first change the extension
from html
into php so when i do that
and open that change the file
in the browser the output is the same so
html is displayed just like it was
displaying before
so that's because php is embedded inside
the html
and in php files you can actually have
only html and nothing else
but you change the extension and it
gives you possibility to write
php tags right here okay so
i'm going to write a php tag less than
question mark
php is the php opening tag and
question mark and greater than is php
closing tag
in between those tags now we can write
php comments
for example let's print hello world
from php echo hello world and semicolon
at the end
i save this refresh in the browser and
it prints hello world
if we have a look in the page source we
don't see these php tags we just see
hello world that's because apache
processes these php tags
evaluates the output and sends that
output
to the browser we can have as many
statements
inside these php tags as we want for
example i can write
hello world and and php
save that semicolon refresh
and here we see hello world and php so
we can also have
multiple php tags inside html
for example just like this one so
echo hello from
another tag okay semicolon
refresh and here we see just because
we are just outputting these things we
see them on a single line
however we can output also html tags
so right here i'm going to write echo
br tag so that will just output beer tag
and now we see this hello from another
tag on a new line
and if we have a look in the page source
we see right here
beer tag using this approach we have
possibility to output
basically any tag for example button
click me just like this one save refresh
and here we see that button okay
let's move on and see how we can have
comments how we can declare comments
in php okay in php there are
three ways to declare comments so
one comment one way
let's say we have basically two ways to
declare single line comments in one
way to declare multi-line comment one
way to declare single line comment is
double
slash so in this single line comment and
that's
common for almost all programming
mainstream programming languages like
python
maybe in python i don't remember exactly
in javascript for example so another
single line comment
is using hashtag single line
and the multiline comment is slash
asterisk
and then asterisk and slash and in
between we can write like
multi line comment move on the next line
right here we can move this down also
multi
another line and so on okay so these are
multi-line comments
okay let's go ahead and see how we can
declare variables
in php so i'm going to open the
variables file
and i'm going to open that variables
file in browser as well
so in general what is a variable
variable is the
pretty much the same in php as in any
programming language
it is a container that stores some
values
okay in php there the variables
basically don't have types
so php is loosely typed language and
whenever you declare variable you don't
specify the type
and the variables have dynamic types
which
change the type based on the value
whatever you assign to it
okay so in order to declare a variable
you need to use the dollar sign
dollar sign and then the variable name
variable
must start with the letter and after
that or underscore
and after that it can contain like
digits as well
so for example name would be a valid
name of the variable
name equals zura for example age
equals to 28 and semicolon so i just
declared
two variables one is name second
is h and i don't use any um any types
for that so let me remove it um i just
wanted to show it to you something
so the name right now has a dynamically
taken type based on the value
and the name has type of string
age dynamically took a type of that
value and it's an integer
so in php there are several ways
several types so here are the types in
php so
string integer float boolean null
array object and resource so now
i'm going to declare five variables with
different types
right here so name age
is male equals true
hate equals 1.85
and salary equals
null okay so the first variable name is
string
age is integer ismail is boolean hate
is float or double
so it can also be double and
the salary is basically now okay
okay what to do if i want to print the
variable so i just use the echo
statement which prints
something and then use the name so a
code name
save that refresh in the browser and we
see zero right here
okay if i want to print another variable
echo
age for example save that and i see them
next to each other so basically because
we don't have any space
between these two echo statements they
are
next to each other i'm going to use the
beer statements this
does just uh this just means
concatenation
so right here i'm gonna use the dot sign
to concatenate
name and beer tag and print both of them
at the same time
and right here i see them on the next
line
so i will do that pr a lot to just show
a couple of things
on the different lines okay so
i'm going to basically print all
variables right here save that and
refresh
excuse me so i i copied something wrong
from my second screen
so right here okay and
the refresh in the browser and here we
have all the output
but look at this ismail is true but
on the browser it prints one which
basically means that whenever boolean is
converted
into a string and boolean is converted
into a string when we try to print that
boolean variable
so whenever it's converted into string
the true is converted into one
and false is converted into an empty
string
okay so if i change that ismail into
false
save and refresh it in browser i don't
see any output
okay because it's converted into an
empty string
the salary is null and null is converted
into an empty string as well
when we try to print it on the screen
okay
so let's uh print the type of these
variables
for this there's a special function git
type so i just type
git type give it a name and
refresh in the browser and we see that
it has a type of
string okay so for age
it will be integer and so on so let's
see all of them so i'm going to paste
this right here
get type for name age ismail hate and
salary refresh
and we see all the different types and
the height is double as i mentioned it
can be float
or it can be double they are basically
the same okay
what if i want to print the whole
variable and that's very useful for
debugging purposes to see what the
variable contains
so i'm going to use var dump a function
for that
specify the variable and refresh in the
browser and right here we see that
this variable is a string with the
length of
4 and this is the variable okay so this
vardaman function is super useful when
working with
large variables like the arrays or the
objects
so it prints out all the information you
need
okay let's print h as well and is
male and salary and
hate okay refresh and right here we see
this is the name this is the age this is
the ismail which is boolean true
the salary is now and the height is
float 1.85
okay now i'm going to change the name
variable into false we know that the
name variable was
zura it was a string after that if i try
to print the type of the name variable
it preads boolean
okay let me show you a couple of useful
functions when working with variables
so for example if i want to check a
specific variable is a string or not
i will use ease string and specify
the variable name and it will evaluate
into true or false
in this case because we change the name
variable and assign false to it
this will evaluate into false so the
name is not string
so we have a couple of other variables
so i'm going to paste this right here we
have
is integer age in our case
age is definitely integer so this will
evolute into true
is boolean is double we have a couple of
others like is array and so on
okay so if i want to check
if the variable is declared or not
i'm going to use is set function
inside the essays function i will
specify the variable name
and this will check if the variable is
declared in the current scope or not
and evaluate into true or false in this
case this will evaluate into true
if i try to call easy set on another
variable like
address for example which is not
declared in the current scope
this will evaluate into false okay
okay let's talk about constants so in
php constant basically is a variable
whenever you assign
something you cannot actually change
that it's not actually in a variable
it's a constant
okay in php we have to use function
define
to define a constant you have to specify
the constant name for example pi and the
constant value for example
3.14 okay
and the value basically can be number it
can be boolean it can be string as well
and in latest versions it can even be
arrays
okay how to print out the constant so
i'm going to use
just pi without taller sign so this is
how we access constants in php
so i just print pi with beer tag refresh
and right here we see
3.14 there are a couple of other
built-in constants
in php which you can just use
so for example sort
sort ask and which just corresponds to
some number
and that's very often used for sort
ascending
okay and another variable another
constant excuse me
is i want to print this php int max
okay we just prints the maximum number
the integer can have in php
so refresh in the browser and right here
i see the four for
sort max constant and the integer max
number is just this
okay that's all about variables let's
move on and talk about
numbers so
i'm going to open a numbers php on the
left side
and numbers php on the right side
as well and let's start
okay so we know how to declare variables
so i'm going to
write away the clear variable like a
equals
5 b equals 4 and
c equals 1.2 okay
you can probably see that the a and b
are integers and c is float okay
now i'm doing arithmetic operations on
that numbers
so for example i'm going to print out
immediately
a plus b so we should print out
9 right so we can have a look 9.
so we can actually have multiple
arithmetic
operations combined like a plus b
and plus c and that will give us 10.2
so if i change that plus into
multiplication
then it's obvious that first the
multiplication is done
and then the addition will happen so we
will get this
9.8 okay if i put this a
plus b in a parenthesis first the
addition will happen
and then the multiplication and we will
get the different answer
okay so basically all kind of arithmetic
operations
uh can be done in php like the addition
subtraction so i'm going to quickly
copy and paste all these things okay
right here
okay and the person signed basically
means
a reminder so the other things i think
are very clear multiplication division
and the module sign means the remainder
so whenever i
a is divided on b what's going to be the
reminder
okay and in our case the reminder will
be
just one okay right here okay
so if i just want to add a
to b but save that information into back
a
i will do just like this right a equals
a plus b but
in php uh and in other programming
languages as well
we can use assignment with math
operators
okay what this does actually mean
is that we can use plus
equals b a plus equals b
means the exact same thing a equals
a plus b and after that i'm going to
print out
immediately a for example the a will be
changed okay so and here we see that the
a
is now nine okay we can do
all uh basically this for all types
so i'm going to copy and paste this and
uncomment the code and right here we see
that
we can do the same thing just i'm going
to comment out one
and leave the others so for example on
subtraction we should see that
a equals one refresh and here we have it
okay on multiplication a will become
20 and so on i'm not going to basically
explore all of them
just to save some time okay
so what about increment operator so
increment operator is
plus plus operator which means that to
increase the
value of the a by one okay
there exists two types of increment
operator plus plus
a plus plus and plus plus a okay
what are the difference so whenever you
use the variable a
a plus plus with some other operation
like the print for example
so when i use that a plus plus with echo
first
the value of the a is taken and printed
and then a is increased by one
okay however if i use that plus plus
a with echo first the value of a
is increased and then it's print out
so right here on the line 23 whenever we
execute this
we should see that a value is
5 right so we should see five printed
okay but the value will be increased by
one and it will
it will become six after that on the
line 24
the value of a is increased and it will
become
seven and then it is print out so we
should see basically five
on that line and seven on that line save
refresh and right here we see 57
basically which means that this is the
five
this is the seven so we can put right
here pr tag
and here we have okay so in the same way
we have decrement operator so
a co a minus minus with
br and a co minus minus
a okay just like this and we should see
the vice versa like the seven
and the five let me put b over here as
well
okay perfect there are a couple of
functions to check if the variable is
number
so for that we have is float for example
and i'm going to specify for example
1.25
and that will evaluate into true that
1.25 is
actually float we have also is double
which basically does the same as
is float so that will finally give us
also true
we have is integer uh is integer
and is int and they are also the same
okay i'm going to specify
5 for example which will evaluate into
true
we have also is is numeric which is
the most interesting one so inside is
numeric
i can specify a string value for example
3 points
uh 45 let's say and this will evaluate
into true because it understands
what's the actual value of that string
and that prints out true
however if i put some string
inside that for example 3g
point 45 this will evaluate into full
false because that is not numeric value
anymore okay i hope this makes sense
so let's see how we can convert a string
value into an
integer or float so if i have a str
number right here variable
which contains a string value for
example
12.34 and i want to convert that
into a float number okay number equals
i'm going to use parenthesis right here
float inside the parentheses parenthesis
and the ester number
okay so that means that take this string
number
and cast it on the float so finally this
number will be a float
and we can see this by dumping that
whole variable number right here refresh
and right here we see 12.34
if i want to convert this into an
integer
so we have to type an integer and that
will be casted into 12 as an integer
so we have other ways like we can use
float
valve as a function and specify this
string number
and that will be converted into string
or we can use int
val and specify the number and this will
be converted into an integer
okay so let's see couple of functions
when
working with numbers so i'm going to
copy and paste these numbers and explain
them
so just to save some time okay so right
here i have a string
written the function name and the
argument given to that function
and this is concatenated to actual
function
execution okay then we have some output
so if we have a look in the browser
i'm going to put br right here
to have a new space new line okay
and here we have so this basically means
that the
uh result of that function execution
is 15. so let's have a look at these
functions the abs function takes number
and
returns the absolute value of that
function
so for negative numbers it will be still
15 and we can have a look right here
the pole takes two arguments
the first is the base and the
second argument is the exponential so 2
in power
3 means 8 the sqrt function takes the
square root from that value
and it's 16. max basically takes the
maximum number of given ones and we can
specify even
multiple numbers right here two nine and
three and this will print out
max will print out nine right here okay
it just prints here two comma three
because i have written two comma three
as a string right here
okay say refresh right here so the
minimum takes the minimum
among given one the round basically
rounds the number in a normal
mathematician
way and this will be 2 and we can see
right here
round of 2.6 will be 3 obviously
and we have floor and sale functions as
well floor
means round down sale means round up
so even if you floor 2.6 this will be
always 2 and the sale of 2.4
will always be 3. okay so let's see
number formatting how we can format
numbers this is very useful
uh function which is used in practice a
lot so let's say that i have a number
um like one two three four five six
seven eight
nine uh point one two three four five
just like this okay large number and i
want to format this
in a in a way that we have for example
um
spaces in between these thousands
and we don't display the
like anything after the two digits after
the
uh decimal separator and we can have a
for example comma so i want to format my
number like this
okay for example so let's use a function
which is called
a number format so echo number format
we have to specify the number then we
have to specify
how many digits i want to be there
after decimal separator and i'm going to
specify two
okay and this will basically strip
everything
after that one two right here okay
so after this we specify what i want to
be
thousand separator and i'm going to
specify
right here no actually the third
argument is
let's have a look decimal point
is the third argument and thousand
separator is the fourth argument
okay so for decimal i'm going to specify
comma and 4000 separator i'm going to
specify
space okay let's save this and refresh
in the browser
and down below we see the following
thing i haven't specified
space right here refresh and here we see
so we see spaces in between this
thousand separator
and we see comma as a decimal separator
so i can change that comma
and put a dot and i can put comma as a
thousand separator so here we have a
different formatted number
okay so here i have a link which
gives you uh all the functions
math functions working with numbers i
really encourage you to
check out that link that's the official
php documentation
and just take all the check out the
functions and see
how they work so that you know what
possibilities you have
in php when working with numbers okay
there are many others
we haven't covered okay let's move on
and talk about
strings
okay i'm going to open strings.php close
the others
and i'm going to open also strings.php
on the right side right here okay
perfect so let's start and create a very
simple string for example
string equals hello
zura for example okay and i'm going to
declare
same type of type of string with double
quotations
right here okay and both of them
basically
are doing at the moment the same so i
can print string
and i can print string two
okay and we can see that they print the
exact same thing
however what's the difference between
the single quotations and double
quotations so
so if i take out that zura and save in a
variable
name for example okay and i want to
concatenate that hello with zura so i
just need to do
hello concatenation in the name right
so dots is basically used for
concatenation
okay right here i'm going to write name
okay and it will give us the same thing
however if that string
is very long and you want that name in
between
you have to do um like not in a very
friendly way like hero hello zura for
example
dot um hello for example
let's write hello i am zura
i am the name and i am
28 for example okay so you have to do
the concatenation just like this
however if you have all this string the
following thing
in double quotations and let's do it
like this hello
i am i can directly put that
dollar name in the double quotation
okay so let's have a look so they are
doing the same thing at the moment
however if i put that dollar name
on the first line in that single
quotation string
it will be printed just dollar name if
you have that name
written in a double quotation in this
case
it will evaluate that as a variable and
print out its value and here we see i
im0
okay so we have already seen how we can
concatenate string so i'm just going to
write a very simple example
hello concatenation with
world okay and we can even specify
concatenation as many times as we want
and
php okay let's put beer here as well
refresh and here we see hello world and
php
okay now i'm going to create a variable
called
string with some value basically i'm
going to
copy the following thing and let's
explore a couple of
functions when working with strings so
here
on line 13 i have a variable hello world
with
spaces next to each other and then i'm
just calling couple of
functions on that string okay and i have
numered them so that we can easily
identify which function
is which one okay and str length
basically prints the length of the
string
okay and we can have a look right here
the length of the string
is 21. trim removes
white spaces from the beginning
of that string and from the end of that
string okay
l trim removes white spaces from the
left side
it means left trim but it leaves that
white space is on the right side
r trim removes white spaces from the
right side but
leaves them on the left side okay and
on the right side basically this stream
um
l3 and rtream basically they are printed
out
pretty much the same but that's because
uh html just ignores the white spaces
okay
so if we have a look in the page source
we can see that this is the result of
the tree
this is the result of the l trim okay
and we have
white spaces on the right side and this
is the result of the
r trim which leaves the white spaces on
the left side
okay so str word count just print outs
the number of
words in that string and
in this case we have two scrive just
reverses that string and we have the
hello world in a reverse order
str2 upper converts every letters into
an upper case
str2 lower converts every letters in
lowercase
we have uke first as well which converts
the first
letter into uppercase which means that
upper case
first so only h will be converted into
an upper case and right here we see
h in uppercase we have lc first which
converts the
first letter into lowercase okay we have
also
uc words which means uppercase words
and only h and w are converted
into an uppercase which basically
converts
the first letters of every word okay so
if i just
print hello world and php right here in
the refresh
we see a and php also in uppercase
okay we have sdr pulse which
searches for world inside that string
and right now on for the number 12
it actually doesn't print anything so
that's because our string doesn't
contain
world with lowercase w okay
we have world with lower case right here
but
uppercase in the uh html in the
initial string sorry okay so
actually if i change the w into
lowercase it will print out 10 right
here okay
but if i want to ignore the case there's
a special function for that
is tr i pose okay which
basically this i additional i means for
ignore case
okay in this case it will search for
world
occurrence that pop-up basically is the
php store and pop-up which
when you mouse over on that function it
gives you the documentation of that
function
okay if you're a vs code user you
probably won't see that
okay so this stri pose in this case will
print
uh 10 okay so we have
substr which substitute just like this
which basically takes up takes out the
substring of the string
okay i want to take out the substring
from that string variable
from position 8 until the end of the
string and
this is the substring okay we can have a
look in the page source
for number 14 and we can see that it
takes out
all the way to the end including white
spaces
however if i want to take out not
the whole whole length length but
several characters for example six only
we can see right here it only takes out
the
six characters okay the third argument
basically indicates the length
of that substring there is also a
function
str replace which searches for
word world in that string
and replaces with php inside that string
okay so the first argument to search
something second argument is to replace
that
and the third argument is where to
search and replace
okay and in our case we um refresh it
and we see hello world hello php right
here
but if i change the w into lowercase
okay lowercase world does not
exist in that string right here
so it won't search that and won't
replace
so right here we see that hello world
the initial string basically whatever
was there okay
however there is another function stri
replace which basically ignores the case
so it searches for that world
ignoring the case and replaces it with
php
inside that string so finally this gives
hello php okay that's basically
a short list of the functions that is in
php in php there are a lot of a lot of
functions
so i really encourage you to check out
that and let's see now
a long text basically multi-line text
with some line breaks so
here i have a text hello uh my name is
zura i'm 27
i love my daughter and i want to
display this text exactly as it is with
these
line breaks okay so if i just print that
long text so because html is ignoring
that white spaces
we will see that thing so basically i'm
going to comment out everything
above okay oops
save that refresh and here we see so
hello my name is and that's basically
all of them in a single line okay
in the page source they are on different
lines but you know why because this is
the html how the html works
so if i want to reserve that line breaks
there is a special function
in our nl 2br which means that
newline to br and it creates br tags
whenever it finds that new line okay
so if i just print this i see that this
is exactly
as i expect as i want okay so and in the
page source
it creates that br tags whenever there
it finds that new line okay
so i'm going to now paste another
multi-line text which has also tags
right there
okay this is the tag this is the text so
it pulls out something
so if i just again print out that
information that long text okay
it prints on a single line with the bold
zura and bold 27. okay so if i want to
reserve that new lines i have to use an
l2br
okay and but sometimes i also want to uh
reserve these tags and display them as a
tags not as a bold
okay so let's just print all of them
okay so i'm going to
copy and paste something okay right here
and let's have a look so i just print
long text then
print nl to br and then i use a new
function which is called html entities
which reserves these b tags and displays
them as
tags not as a bold let's have a look
so i'm going to comment out these above
two
okay and here we have three output so
this is the first one
displayed as expected this is the second
one displayed as expected
but i want this to be displayed as it is
written in the code
okay okay right here we have the b tags
but i want also these spaces to be
reserved
so we have to use right here nl to br
not to but this should be four and l2br
and
html entities together okay nl2br
giving the html entities and that
finally gives me what i want what i have
written
in my code okay with the tags
and with the correct line breaks if we
have a look
in the page source we see that these
entities
how they are converted into an entities
that greater than
and less than symbols okay that's why
you need to have basic knowledge of html
to know what are in general
html entities
okay so that's basically um all i wanted
okay let me show you
also how you can decode that html
entities okay so if you have converted
if you have these entities so i'm gonna
take out
these uh probably okay
and just right here uh type
html entity the code okay
give that string and it will decode that
and print the decoded one so right here
we see that sura
okay in the uh source code we see that
the b text surround the b text okay
so that is html entities code so i'm
going to open this link right here we
have a lot of
string functions as always i encourage
you to check out that
documentation link read that functions
at least once to understand
what is possible in php
okay okay let's move on and talk about
arrays
so i'm going to open right here arrays
okay open that on the right side as well
okay and let's start okay what are in
general areas
so arrays is a arrays are variables
which can contain more than values
so it contains a series a list of
values okay how to declare a raising php
so we declare a variable for example
fruits which equals
square brackets and inside the square
breakers we put the values
okay this is pretty much similar
the same as it is in javascript for
example if you're familiar with
javascript
but we have another option to declare
areas like array inside the parenthesis
okay
that's an old old-fashioned approach but
you
will meet this very often because it is
used heavily
but i'm going to declare with square
brackets okay so
i'm going to declare three elements
inside that array
banana apple
and orange okay
so sometimes i declare with double
quotations sometimes single ones
so i don't have a like a preferred
choice okay
if i want to use a variable inside the
single quotations i generally
inside that string i will use the double
quotations
okay so let's print the whole variable
and i'm going to use
a var dump for that specify the fruits
and refresh in the browser and we see
that's not very user-friendly and
readable text
okay if we have a look in the page
source we see that
in a nicer way and it is readable
actually so this
indicates that this is an array of three
elements this is the
uh first element string with sixth
length this is the second element
with the index one and this is the last
element okay
so arrays in php start with index zero
so that's why this is the zeroth element
this is the first element this is the
second element okay but if i want to
this to be readable and visible uh
nicely in the browser so i generally use
the pre-tags
okay so pre-opening tag
and right here i use a pre-closing tag
so i save refresh this and this is how i
see
and i also have a shortcut right here
dump
specify the fruits and this is as easy
okay so let's see how we can access
elements by index
so if i want to print the element at
index 1 for example i will use fruits 8
1 with square brackets notation and just
print that
okay save refresh right here we see this
apple
if i want to if i try to access element
at position three
i will get a warning because there is no
element at position
three okay so if i want to set
element by index i can do in the same
way
for for example fruits at position zero
i'm going to change that
into peach for example
save and then let's just print the whole
new array fruits and we saved the first
one it is not banana
anymore it is now pitch okay so if i
want to check if specific
element exists in um
area yet specific index if there isn't
something
in the array i'm going to write fruits
at position 2 for example
and put this in the easy set function
okay
we have seen that is set when working
with variables
so this finally evaluates into true that
there is
an element at position 2. if i specify
right here 3 there is no
element at position 3 so this will
evaluate
into false so if i want to
append element at the end of that
array i'm going to use a square brackets
notation
and add right here banana for example
okay and we can dump the whole fruits
once again
and see that and down below we have
banana as the last
element at position three so whenever
you append
it takes the next uh next index
okay so if we want to print the whole
length of that
array i'm going to use a count function
and specify that fruits
this will finally give us length of four
because we have four elements
okay so we see how we can append with
the square brackets notation but there
exists a special functions for that as
well so for example
array underscore push we specify the
array
and we specify the variable
the string the value i want to append
and it can be
even not a string but it can be number
so in php areas basically can have a
different
type of failures there okay you can have
a mix of numbers and strings and
booleans and even sub arrays and
everything okay so i'm going to specify
right here just
full okay i want to append the full in
the fruits area
and we can dump right now the whole
fruits area and we can see
down below that we see a full right here
if i want to a remove element from the
end of the array
i'm going to use a function array pop
okay
so i specify the fruits this will remove
the last
element which is in this case full and
return that for so we can print that
immediately but it will also modify this
original array so if i dump that
original array
we won't see full anymore inside that
area okay so refresh it
right here i see foo which is taken out
and printed
but we don't see foo anymore inside it
area
so if i want to append not append but
insert the element at the beginning of
the array i have to use
array and shift okay i specify the array
and i'm going to specify bar for example
so i want to put bar
at the beginning of that array and let's
just print the whole
fruits refresh it and right here i see
bar as a first element of that array
if i want to remove that element the
first one from the array
i'm going to use array shift specify the
fruits
that will take it out and let's just
print and the fruits will be changed so
i'm not going to print this so it's
obviously clear so if i have a string
for example
and um that string contains
a couple of fruits for example banana
coma apple comma and peach
and i want to convert this into an array
i have to use function
explode okay i'm going to specify the
delimiter in this case they are
like delimited by comma and i'm going to
specify the string
and that will create an array and return
that array
so if i just dump the whole array and
refresh
right here i see this three elements
array okay
okay let's see the vice versa operation
so if i have a fruits
array which actually is described and i
want to combine them
with some separator i can use an implode
function
okay i'm going to specify the glue using
which i want to implode them
and i can use comma or n symbol okay
and then specify the array and that
finally creates a string
combines them with that's glue and
save and refresh and we see right here
peach
apple orange and banana of our original
fruits area
combine them as a string okay if i want
to check if
specific element exists in array or not
i'm going to use a function in
underscore array
first we specify the element we're
looking for for example
apple i want to check if apple is inside
that array or not
and then we specify the array and if we
put this in the var dump statement this
will return true or false
and in this case because we have apple
in our original fruits area
this prints true if i check if mango
exists inside that fruits
refresh it we don't see this returns
false
if i want to search for an element index
note just check if the element is in the
array but
also search for that index i'm going to
use a function array search
again we specify right here an element
for example mango
in that fruits array and that finally
returns the index but if the element
doesn't exist in this case mango doesn't
exist
this still return false however if it
finds that element
apple for example it returns the index
of that
apple okay so if i have two areas and i
want to
merge them into single one so for
example i'm going to create a
vegetables array
and i'm going to put right here potato
for example
and cucumber okay and i want to merge
these
fruits and vegetables into single one so
i have to use a function
array underscore merge and i'm going to
specify
first array and secondary the ordering
basically matters
because in the final merged array they
will be in the same order
so fruits first and then vegetables
and that finally will return a new array
which i can
assign to a variable or i can just print
just like this one
refresh and right here i see a new array
with element six
peach apple orange banana potato and
cucumber
okay in php 7.4 which is right now at
the moment of recording this
the latest version uh in several months
we're gonna expect
uh php 8.0 in november it will be
released
but at the moment php 7.4 is the latest
one
and there is a better and better way to
merge two
arrays okay new notation okay which is
called
uh spread operator okay so i'm going to
dump all these things so let me put far
dump
right here and
i'm dumping new array and three dot
notation
and specify fruits comma three dot
and specify vegetables okay right here
my php storm
puts in red underline it tells me that
spread operators in areas are available
in php 7.4
only so that happens because my php
storm
does not know what what language level
i'm using
so it actually internally has its own
language level
but it cannot understand that i'm using
php 7.4
so i'm going to go to the file and
settings if you're using php store
and right here if we go into languages
and frameworks
go to php right here we see php language
level set too
so it is set to 5.6 okay
i can change that into 7.4 and it will
understand and it won't give me any
errors okay so i'm gonna hit
ok and the errors basically disappear
or i can do this in a shorthand way like
set
this back to five point 5.6 and
right here it gives me also this link
switch to php 7.4 language level i'm
going to hit
ok and the error basically disappears
okay so if i want to uh sort the areas
basically
i have a function for that sort i'm
going to specify fruits
and this will sort the arrays and return
them
just modify the original array okay in
the in the correct order so if i just
print
fruits right now this will finally give
me
syntax error right here semicolon is
missing
refresh and right here down below
we have that apple banana orange and
peach
so if i print that fruits area before
sorting and after sorting so this is
before sorting
we see how it changes okay so we if we
want to sort that in a reverse order
we have to use our sort okay reverse
sort
and right here we see it in a reverse
order
okay let's talk about associative areas
okay what is an associative area
associative area is key value peers okay
and it's very heavily used in php
so i'm going to create right here a
person variable
which is an associative array i'm going
to comment out
everything at the top okay
just like this one and let's create an
associative array of a person
name is for example bread
surname is for example traversie
and age is 30
and hobbies is
tennis and i don't know video games
okay here we have the person associative
area
okay if i just dump the whole person
print that so i can see that this is an
array of four elements the name
corresponds to string of four
bread and so on so we have basically
everything so this
bar dump basically prints out everything
by the way there
exists a second function for printing
areas which is called
print underscore r many people prefer
this printer i generally use var dump
but you should also know about that so
this is how the array will be printed
using print r
okay so i'm going to return this back
into var dump
so now let's say that i want to access
to the name of that person and print out
the name so
i'm going to use person square
briquettes name
and this will finally print out the name
of that person if i try to access
some non-existing key for example
address
it will give me warning notice that
undefined index address for that person
which is pretty logical so if i want to
set
something for example i want to set the
person's
channel and i'm going to set this into
traversing
media okay so this is how i can set new
values
and whenever i set this if i dump the
whole person
then i can see that this person now
contains
channel as well right there and the
array has
five length so there exists basically
five
elements in that array okay so
in php 7.4 there exists null coalescing
assignment operator so which is
a very weird name but
it's very handy feature so for example
if i want to check if the person has
address
and if the person doesn't have address
i'm going to set the address
to unknown so i have to do like this if
uh is set person
address okay and i'm gonna put note sign
right here okay
if person address does not exist
okay i'm gonna set the person address
to be unknown okay
and then finally if i just dump the
person i will see that
the address of that person right here is
unknown
okay but in php 7.4
there exists a shorthand version for
that okay
and that is double uh question mark
okay so right here i'm going to write
person
address okay question mark question mark
equals unknown
okay so what does this mean this means
that
this double quotient generally is used
for checking
if the uh value is set or not
okay so i can write this in the
following way as well
question mark question mark unknown so
let's just remove this
okay so which checks that if the person
address is set or not okay
if it is set then take the person
address if it is not set
take the unknown okay so if i comment
out this thing
and dump the person
on the right side we see that it has
address unknown
and i can even make this simpler and put
that
question mark question mark right here
refresh it and i see
the exact same result okay
so if i want to check if the array has a
specific
index or not i have to use that easy set
function
so if i want to print the whole keys of
that array
i'm going to use array underscore
keys i'm going to specify person and
this will give me
the keys of that associative array
person
so refresh it and right here we see this
is an array and here are the keys
name surname age hobbies channel and
address
if i want to print the values
of that array i'm going to use array
underscore values function
specify the person save it
refresh on the right side and we see the
values like the prey traversing 30
this is the hobbies value this is the
channel and this is the address
okay there is even possibility to sort
the person by
keys or by values okay so i'm going to
use k-sort
specify that person and which will
change the person and sort sorted by
keys so if we just print out the person
we see right here that we see first
address then age then channel hobbies
and so on
okay if we want if i want to sort that
by values i'm going to use a sort
okay save and refresh this and first i
see bread
traversing the introverse media then
unknown
and then we have agent hobbies
okay so in php and
uh yeah it's it's very common in php to
work with
um two-dimensional areas okay especially
when working with databases
okay let's have a look at the example of
two-dimensional
array so for example i'm going to create
two do's right here as an array
and each of the to-do element i'm going
to make a sub
array okay which will be associative
area
and each of the to-do element i'm going
to give title
to that which will be to do title
1 and give it also completed
completed property which corresponds to
true for example in this case so i'm
going to make this
a little bit larger move it on the oops
move it on the right side just like this
one and i'm going to duplicate this and
create 2d title 2
with completed false okay and this is
the associative area and very often we
work
developers with that associative areas
okay this is
this is how the data might look like
when you receive from some rest apis
or uh selected from the database okay
and i'm just going to dump this and
let's have a look together
and we're going to have a practice on
that of course so here it is how it
looks like so area of two elements the
first element is
area itself with the title of this with
completed of this
this is the second element with the
title of this and completed of this
okay so that's all about areas let's
move on and talk about
conditionals okay let's open
conditionals.php right here and
on the right side as well
and write couple of if else statements
so in general if you have any experience
in any programming language
if else statements you know what is an
e-file statement right
so let's see how we can do that in in
php
so if in the parenthesis we write some
condition for example if age
equals to 20 okay and then if age equals
20 we just print something for example
one okay so if we have a look in the
browser we see one
so that happens because the age actually
equals equals to 20. so we can actually
write ifall statements without these
curly braces so if we want a single
statement
right here we can avoid that curly
braces
so i'm going to copy this paste right
here and just remove these
curly braces and it works in the same
way we can even write this on a single
line
and sometimes like the developers write
like this so i generally write with
curly braces
because it's more readable for me
but it's basically a matter of your
choice
okay so we see like one and one right
here
so let me write in a simple if and then
else statement so if
for example age is greater than
20 then we write
one if uh in other case else
so which means in any other case we just
write two
okay so refresh it and right here we see
two okay let's see what is the
difference between the
double quotation and triple quotation in
php
okay so i'm going to comment out the
other things
and right here i'm going to write if
age equals 20
then let's just print one
okay with br
okay and another example is if
age equals
string 20 okay and
if we just print these two for example
both of them will be printed okay so we
see one and two
it happens because whenever we compare
the
variable two values to each other
with double quotation only values are
compared
right now the age is uh integer 20
and we're comparing it to string 20
and because we are using double
quotations the values
are compared and it prints it prints two
so it is
actually true so if we just change this
and put right here triple quotation
this won't be satisfied because not only
values but also
types will be checked and compared okay
so i'm going to paste something right
here and look at this so
age with a double quotation 20 is true
age with a double quotation 20 as a
string is also true
h with triple quotation 20 is true
because
age is integer and we're comparing
integer to an
integer but age with triple quotation 20
is false because also types are checked
okay okay let's see how we can use
multiple conditions in the if statement
so i'm going to write if
for example age equals or is
greater than 20 and salary for example
equals to 300 000
in this case do something okay to
something okay in this case it will
it will not be satisfied because age
basically is not more than 20.
okay but if i change this condition into
equals 20 this will print to something
okay we can also use or operator so if
h is greater than 20
or with two pipe or the salary
equals three hundred so thousand do
something
okay in this case we will see do
something because
the first condition is false but the
second condition
evaluates into true okay so
let's see how we can write ternary if
and what is in general ternary
operator so terminal ternary if operator
is
very often used for uh for con
is a conditional statement for something
very small not if we have a bunch of
code to execute if something is executed
if something is evaluated in the true so
let me show you where i mean so if
age is less than 22 for example
okay and i put right here question mark
which
uh basically indicates that if this ev
is evaluated into
true then execute like a young
for example okay return that string
young
otherwise like return old for example
okay so this finally will print young
right here because the age is definitely
less than 22.
okay if i change that a age into 25 for
example
this will print old okay because the
else
statement is actually satisfied
so there is a way to have a short
ternary operator as well so
for example if we want to check if the
age exists
at all so i'm going to write if age
question mark
colon and otherwise
like 18 for example so if i want to
create
a variable like my age for example
which equals to age if age exists
otherwise take the 18. okay if we just
print right now that my age
this will print 25 because the age
exists and it is
25 however if i change that
age into 0 for example and 0 basically
is
falsible value okay so age
if age exists take that age otherwise
take 18. in this case
age is falsible value so age
won't be taken will be 18 will be taken
and right here we see this 18
okay so there exists null
coalescing operator also and it's very
useful a relatively new feature it
didn't exist from the beginning of the
php
but it's very handy feature so if i want
for example to check
if the variable is declared or not for
example if
a name is declared okay if name is
set then take out the name otherwise
take out john for example as a name okay
and we can assign this into my name okay
and whenever i print these right now it
will take john because we don't have
name
declared in the current variable right
but there's a shorthand version for that
so we can just write
name question mark question mark
and join okay which means that if name
exists take out the name if doesn't
exist take out the join so
they are basically equivalent to each
other okay
let's see switch statements so right
here i'm going to create a user role
variable
which will be admin and let's say that
we support other roles as well like the
editor a user and admin as well of
course
so i'm going to write a switch statement
right here switch
user role which checks we takes the user
role and we have to write couple of case
statements
so if the user role is admin case for
case
admin okay we just print we just do
something which is relevant for admin
okay
for now i'm gonna just print admin okay
and we have to break
right here okay so another case
will be editor okay if the
user role is editor let's just print
editor right here and break as well
so another case is user and let's just
print right here user
and break and we can have a default
value
which means in any other case let's just
print
invalid role okay
so if i save this and refresh right here
i see admin
okay the following code will be executed
if i change that user rule into editor
and save and refresh this i see right
here editor
if i change this something like
web admin for example okay this will
print invalid role because that doesn't
exist
okay that's all about conditionals let's
move on
the next topic is
is loops okay so let's open loops on the
browser
as well and see how we can write loops
in php
so i'm going to write a while loop okay
while
then inside the while we write some
condition
so while true for example okay do
something
which basically means an infinite loop
because this true will
always be true and the while loop will
basically crash your browser okay
don't run this because it will start an
infinite loop but instead it's more
relevant to have some condition
right here which changes after some time
into
um two folds the while loops basically
are
the infinite loops basically sometimes
are used uh in a
in real programming okay so let's create
right here counter which equals to zero
and i'm going to create a while loop
while counter
for example is less than 10 let's
print the counter okay and we need to
increase that count
okay so you can understand that
first the counter will be printed as 0
then it will be increased
okay after that the condition will be
checked if counter is less than 10
and then the counter increased counter
will be printed and so on
and after 10th iteration the loop will
be
basically broken okay so we can manually
break the loop if we want for example if
counter reaches to 5 we can break
the loop and it won't be executed so the
break basically stops the loop
okay so i'm going to comment this
let's see do while okay do while
has the following syntax we write do and
then we write
something for example echo counter okay
and then we have the while condition
while
counter is less than 10 for example okay
so i'm gonna comment this thing and we
have counter zero
and we do something similar but we need
to increase the counter
as well so here is the difference
between while
and to while so right now at the moment
it will also print one two three
zero one two three four five um until
nine
okay let's put beer here as well but the
difference is that
if i change that condition counter is
less than zero
okay in this case first it prints the
value and then checks the condition and
in this case it will be printed at least
once okay but in our
first example in case of while if i
change this into 0
it will never be printed because counter
is 0
if counter is less than zero and this
condition evaluates into false
and the body won't be executed okay
but in this case it will be executed
once
okay let's comment out this all the
things
and see a for loop example okay
for loop has the following syntax four
then we write
a statement which is right at the
beginning of the for loop
for example i equals zero okay
then we write statement which is
executed
before every iteration of the for loop
and if that evaluates into true we
actually continue the for loop
okay so if i is less than 10
and then we write a statement which is
run
after each iteration okay i plus plus
okay so and let's just print i for
example which indicates
the counter and it will give us the same
exact
output what we had for uh while loop
okay
so this is how you can write uh for
loops
so let's see how we can write forage
sometimes forage is very often used
with with some arrays okay so if i have
an
array right here for example
fruits array and i want to
iterate over the fruits area okay i can
do like this
okay for each fruits is
fruit which means that take each element
of that fruits array
as a fruit variable and right here i can
write
that fruit variable okay save refresh
and we see banana apple and orange
i can also take out the index if i want
i
for example corresponds to fruit
so right here i will be index of that
array elements
and the fruit will be actual value okay
so refresh this
save and then refresh we don't print the
i so let's just print i
in that way br save and refresh and here
we see
zero banana first apple to orange
okay so let's see how we can iterate
over an
associative area okay so i'm gonna paste
right here an
associative variable person okay and
then let's iterate over that associative
every person okay
when we are iterating over an
associative array sometimes we want to
take out the key as well okay
so key and value okay
so this is the key this is the value
this is the key this is the value so we
want to iterate over that
so i'm gonna do like this so just print
out
the key then space
and the value okay however we're going
to have a small problem right here
because right here the hobbies
corresponds to array
so arrays cannot be converted into
strings uh in that way just with the
concatenation way
okay we're going to have it notice right
here
array to string conversion so let's put
beer here
so right here we see that name is bread
surname is drivers ages
30 and right here we see array to string
conversion
okay so that's a problem so however what
we can do is that
we can run an implode on that and
implode that with commas so here we have
it
refresh it what's wrong
yes this is the problem so right now i
did a mistake so i put an implode right
here
but that implode is called onbread
traversing in 30 as well
okay what we can do right here is that
we can write an if statement
if for example value is
array okay that value we can
output with the implode okay just like
this one
echo implode with
comma the value however if it's not an
array we can print like we are printing
okay right here so we just need to print
a value so save and refresh and here we
see
so name bread surname privacy age is
this and hobbies is tennis and video
games
that's combined with the comma okay
so that's basically all about loops
let's move on on the next topic
okay i'm going to open the next topic
which is functions
let's open in the browser as well and
okay let's see how we can create
functions in php okay
so i'm going to create a very simple
function
hello function hello
which simply outputs
hello i am sure okay
now the syntax basically of the function
declaration
is pretty much the same in javascript
for example if you're familiar so we
write the function keyword
and the function name then parenthesis
and right here we write this curly
braces so i'm going to execute that
hello now
okay which will print out hello i am
zura so i can execute this multiple
times
and here we have the multiple outputs
the purpose of the function
is to avoid some code repetition and
have a reusable piece of code
which can be used from different
different places
okay also we can pass arguments to that
function
okay so let's see a function with the
argument
right here i'm going to create another
function hello
but i'm going to comment out this one
because we we cannot have
functions with the same names and right
here i'm going to accept an
argument of name okay and here we can
write
hello i am and the name okay
fine now when we call hello we have to
specify
name for example zura save that and
refresh and here we see hello i
am zura i can call the same function
with different bread
with different names sorry bread for
example
and right here we have hello and bread
okay
we can also return the values from that
function i'm going to write
return here and in this case this code
won't print anything
because we don't have an echo statement
so this hello function returns the value
but we need to print that value to see
the outputs right
so i'm going to put pr here as well and
here as well
save and refresh and here we see hello i
am zura
hello i am red
okay let's create a function to sum two
numbers okay function sum
which accepts a and b and i want to
return the sum of the two numbers
a plus b okay
it is that easy i'm gonna call that sum
pass right here
uh four and five and that returns the
value so we have to print these using
echo
and right here we see the 9. okay
so what if i want to uh pass i want to
my function to support many arguments
like the in unlimited number of
arguments
okay so let's comment this and create
another function
sum which accepts basically uh many
arguments so right here when i call that
sum i want to pass multiple arguments
just like this
and i want it to return the sum of all
just like this one okay we can accept
the argument right here with three dot
notation
okay for example nums which means that
take out all the given arguments and
save in the nums
as an array okay so right here
i'm going to write nums okay save that
and uh refresh right here and we see
that
array okay so i have a challenge for you
so pause the video video and write
a for loop right here which will
sum up the given numbers and return
that sum okay so just pause the video do
this for several minutes
and then come back to see my answer
okay so here is my answer so i'm going
to create a variable
sum in which i'm going to save all the
values the sum value of that numbers
okay
then i'm going to iterate over my
numbers okay for each nums
is num okay or just in
and then i'm going to write sum plus
equal n okay
and finally i'm going to return that
sum so finally when i save this and
refresh in the browser i see right here
value
21. okay let's move on and see
arrow functions so arrow function is a
new feature
added in php 7.4 so in fact i can
i'm going to take the following sum
function and paste
right here and just change this using
arrow function
okay so let's comment all this thing
and i want my sum function right here to
do the same thing
but i'm going to use array reduce
array reduce so in php there exists
also functions like array filter array
map
and reduce and let's see how we can use
reduce
with the arrow function okay the array
accepts we need to pass two arguments
first is the array for example nums
and second we have to pass the arrow
function okay
the error function is syntax is the
following fn
parenthesis inside the parentheses we
give carry
okay as a now the first argument inside
that function
and then we accept the n which is the
each
element of that array okay and we just
return
carry plus n okay
let's actually see what this will do i'm
going to return the value
of that from the function and if we just
say that and refresh we see 21 but how
this actually works the array reduce
so on the first iteration it basically
iterates over the elements and calls
that given function for each of the
element
on the first iteration when it calls
that function
it passes the first argument first
element of that nums
array as a carry and the second element
as an
n okay we take that first element and
second element
and return sum okay right here
this basically means to return from that
function
okay from that arrow function so we
return
first plus second which will become the
carry for the next iteration okay so
first plus second is a three
so for next iteration carry will become
three
and n will become the next element which
will be three
okay then three plus three will be
returned from that function
which will be given to the next
iteration as six
and the end will become four and so on
until the end of the array and finally
this gives
us this sum okay okay
that's basically all about functions i
wanted to uh
show to you let's move on and see how we
can work with
dates in php i'm going to open on the
left side
dates php on the right side as well
right here and let's see how we can
print date okay
so let's say that i want to print the
current date so for this i will use the
date function and we have to specify the
format in which i want to print it
so for example first print the er
then month then day then hour
minute and second okay
let's put echo in front of that and
refresh in the browser
and here we see that date this is the
current date
okay so if i want to print for example
yesterday so echo date
the same format basically your month day
hour minute and second
but we have we can specify the timestamp
so
timestamp basically is number of seconds
from 1970 first
of january uh midnight
okay so right now the time
will return this is the current time in
seconds
okay and i can subtract
a number of seconds for one day so for
example
30 multiplied 16 multiplied on 16
and that multiplied on 24 which is
number of
seconds per day so if i save that and
refresh
and let's put beer here as well
refresh right here we see that this is
yesterday okay the same time
but yesterday so what if i want to print
the date in a different format
so let's put beer here as well so echo
for example
date but i want to specify a different
format
okay so how i can do it in the following
link there exists many different formats
sorry about that okay so right here i
can specify
f j y
h i and
s okay so the basically time is the same
but i change the date format
okay and let's just have a look in the
browser
and this is october 12 2020
okay so and on the following link you
can find
more date formats and more in general
more about dates and i really encourage
you to check out that link
okay so what if i want to print
the current timestamp okay we have
already saw this
this is using time okay so let's print
out this and we can see
number of seconds since 17
since uh 1917 okay first of january
so there's also a possibility to parse
the date
sometimes the date comes from the client
from the forms very often
and we want to parse that date okay
there exists
a date parse function for that
and we have to specify right here the
date
for example 2020 um
i know 10 for example 12 12
this is the month this is the day and
this is going to be the
hours for example 0 9 0 0
0 0 okay and
this returns an array okay this is the
parsed
parsed date and we just print that
parsed date and have a look in the
browser and we see it is an
array it has year 2020 month 10
day 12 hour minute second and it has
couple of other information
as well okay sometimes we have that
dates in a different format
and we want to parse that based on the
different format
okay so for example i'm going to paste
this code right here
so for example i have a date string
which is february 4
2020 and the following time and i want
to parse
using that format okay so i will call a
special function
date parse from format i will specify
the format right here in which
that date time is and i specify the date
time itself
and finally this this will give me the
same type of output
yar 2020 month 2 day 4
and so on we have everything there we
need
okay that's all about dates i encourage
you to check out the following links
which will be on the github repository
and let's move on on
next topic the next topic is about
including files so i'm going to close
all the files right here
open that directory on the right side
include and require website skeleton
so let's open this right here as well
website skeleton
right here we have two files so about
php
and index.php and this is a simulation
of a website okay so we have two files
and we can we have a header and we can
navigate
between these two pages so this is the
home page which displays welcome to my
cool website
and some georgia tbc time zone okay the
the temperature excuse me and we have
also
that about page okay and the header
and the footer for that pages are the
same so this is the header
this is the footer and they are the same
for both of them
but if we can if we have a look at the
files right here
we see that the
the html is basically repeated okay
this is the about php this is the
index.php and we have things repeated
so we shouldn't have that so if i want
to add a script tag for example in the
head
i had to do this in both places okay and
we can actually
do in a better way using php so what we
need to do
is take out that header and create a
file
for that and we can use that header file
in both of the files
okay let's do this i'm going to create a
file
called header php but i'm going to
create that in a partials folder okay
inside partials let's create header php
okay so i'm going to take out that
header
and paste this right here okay
and now in the about.php and in the
index.php
as well i can use that file okay
how i do this first of all we need
inside this
php opening and closing text and then
i'm going to write
include okay i want to include a file
which is called
partials slash header php
okay let's uh let's actually take out
this and
do it in about okay save and refresh
and i can see the same result nothing
was actually changed because
that works fine so if i have mistakenly
typed incorrect file path
on about page we're gonna see an error
right here okay
so for including files there exists
basically
two ways to include the files one is
include
second is require okay
so what is the difference between
include and require so if i have this
code written using include on the right
side
in the about page let's change this into
a non-existing file
okay and if we are including file which
doesn't exist
then it gives us this warning the file
was not found
but the rest of the code basically is
executed
okay so it prints about us and we also
see that footer
okay however if we change this using
require okay this is
this has different purpose so in this
case we will see
fatal error right here and the rest of
the code is not executed anymore
okay so when the file is not found using
require it basically
stops the code from execution so we
should have
uh require when that file is absolutely
necessary for
uh for the website for the functionality
okay and we can have include
when it is not absolutely necessary okay
there also exists include ones and
require
one's methods uh statements okay
operators so if i duplicate this if i
fix the path first of all
and duplicate this and reverse in the
browser i see this header twice
and if i have a look in the page source
i also see that doctype
html twice okay so if i change that
include once include into include ones
okay in this case no matter how many
times you're including that files
the php will check if it's once included
it won't include anymore okay and this
is how it looks like
okay so basically in this case the
perfect example will be to write an
include once
for here and here as well and we
probably need to create footer as well
so i'm going to create right here
a footer
paste this and include that footer
right here footer php
and in the about page as well so let's
copy this code
and paste right here so now we can see
that we don't have any code duplication
okay and this is how our website is
looking like
okay it works in the same way as it was
working before
okay the second usage of including that
files
one of them is including in the html and
second way is to have
a reusable piece of code which can be
included on different from different
areas okay
so for example i'm gonna go into that
functions in the index.php
and let's say that i'm developing a math
library for example and i'm going to
create math.php
okay inside that math
file i'm going to create a couple of
functions working with
numbers okay for example ed which will
accept a and b and
return sum of that okay a
plus b and let's create second one as
well which will be
subtract which will accept a and b as
well
a and b and return
a minus b okay
so and this is the math library and i'm
going to use that math library
in the index.php okay so right here
i'm going to write include once
that math.php okay and now i can use
that functions
for example echo aid four plus five
okay and echo subtract
five and four okay let's put b
here as well let's save this
and let's open the corresponding file
right here functions and here we see
nine
and one however what's the
correct usage right here it's not
include once the correct one so if that
math file was not found it doesn't
make any sense to continue the execution
and because the other ones will also
print that
error okay so if the math doesn't exist
this one will give us the warning
because this is included not to require
but the other ones will give us also
error right here
okay fatal error call to undefined
function 8.
so in this case the best will be if we
have require
okay and when the file was not required
it won't execute the rest of the code
and we will see only one error
okay and also the best will be if we
have right here require once
because if we have this required and
required couple of times
then we're going to have a different
error cannot really clear
it because it's already declared okay
so the best example will be to write
such kind of
libraries in general using require
once okay save reload and everything
works fine okay that is all about
including files
let's move on on the next topic and see
how we can work with the file system
okay let's open that file system folder
right here index.php i'm going to close
the others
and open that on the right side as well
right here fs okay perfect
so first of all let's explore couple of
magic constants and what are these magic
constants
okay so magic constants are constants
which
change the their value based on the
execution
context okay so for example i'm going to
print right here and
two magic constants deer and
file echo file okay
and let's print the third one as well
which will be
line okay so what
what will be the output of that let's
have a look so first of all that magic
constantine
prints the current directory where that
file is located okay in this case that
prints that
11 fs the file magic constant
prints the current file from which
we are printing that everything and that
magic constant line
prints the line on which
this is written actually so if i put a
couple of enters right here that little
magic constant line
moves on the next line seven and that
finally will print right here seven look
at this
so these are the magic constants okay
let's see how we can create
directory in php so for this we have to
use a function mkdir
and we have to specify a directory
name test in this case let's save this
and refresh on the right side and let's
have a look
here we have it so test directory was
created
so what if we want to rename that
directory so
let's comment this and i'm going to
write rename
okay so it will take that test let's
take the test directory and rename into
test
two okay and this will do the renaming
so if if i want to delete
delete that directory and we have to use
rmd and we have to specify that
test2 directory so at the moment when
rename will happen the directory will be
called
test2 and it should be removed
okay so let's save this and execute this
and we don't see that test folder
anymore because it was first renamed
into test2
and then it was removed so what if i
want to read
file and its content so for this we have
to use a function
file get content file get contents we
have to specify
the file name in this case lorem.txt
let's say that we want to read that
which has some dummy text right there
okay
and this basically reads the file and
returns the output of that file
okay and we can directly send that
output to the browser
so save that and refresh and
we have to comment out this because
there are no test folder anymore
refresh it and here we see that output
the content of that file
okay so there exists other ways to read
the file
in general and i really encourage you to
check out the following link i'm going
to open this link
also soon okay let's see how we can
list the directory and read all that
files and folders inside that directory
okay so i'm gonna write here scandir
and specify the directory and which will
read the directory
and show a list of all files and folders
inside that directory okay so
let's call it files variable and let's
print that
files variable save and refresh
and right here we see that list so what
does this
dot and double dot mean so this will be
always there whenever you scan your
directory
and this dot basically indicates the
current directory and double dot
indicates the parent directory okay and
besides that we have also index php and
lorem.txt in the current directory
so if i pass right here double dot slash
which means that
list the parent directory and save and
refresh these
here we see all the files and the
folders
which are in the parent directory and
this is that directory
what we see right here okay
okay perfect let's see how we can write
content
inside that file okay so we saw file get
contents now let's see
file put contents so we specify some
file name for example sample.takesteam
and we specify content some content
okay when we execute this
it will create that sample.txt right
here
here we see if we open we see some
content right there
okay so we can combine that file get
contents and file
put contents together and read the
content
and append something at the bottom and
put it
uh in the um file put contents
okay so the file get contents also
supports to get the content from the url
so for example let's open json
place holder okay which is the fake
rest api and i'm going to scroll down
right here and find the resources for
the users
and copy the following link and i want
to read the content from the following
url
okay so i'm going to use file get
contents specify the url
and that fetch the data from that url
and
save it in a variable like users
json for example okay and we can
print that user.json
right here refresh it and
scroll down and here we see that user
json
right here it starts so if we have a
look in the page source
scroll down we see it in a nicer way
this is the user
json fetched from the json placeholder
and the json basically is a type
of the um how the data can be exchanged
and how the data can be stored okay and
we have also a possibility to convert
that
json data into an array and we have to
use
json decode for that so we specify
user json that will convert that user
json into an
associative array into an array more
correctly
and let's just print that users
okay save that and refresh it
and scroll down and right here we see
so um right here we see that this is an
array of
10 elements the first element is the
object
which has id name username email and
address which is an object itself and so
on so
each individual user will be right here
okay by default when we call json decode
this converts the associative arrays
into
objects okay but we can specify right
here
uh false okay uh
for false or true a source false no we
can specify
true right here which means that to
convert into an associative array
and right here we see that this is not
object anymore it is an associative
area okay with key value peers
okay let's comment this thing
and basically there are a couple of
other useful functions like
file exists for example which checks if
the specific file exists or not
and i'm going to specify right here for
example sample.txt
which will return true because we just
created
sample.txt okay but if we specify right
here in an existing
file it will return false obviously
we can also check if the specific folder
is directory or not
and we can specify for example test if
test is a directory and this will return
false because the test directory does
not even exist
right here okay so this will return
obviously false
so let's open the link right here we
have a lot of functions
so i really encourage you to check out
the following link
and experiment with the functions so
right here you can find basically
everything about the file system how to
get the file
size how to get the file modification
time
and many many others so i really
encourage you to check out the following
link okay
we cannot cover all the functions in
this
several hours course okay let's move on
on the next topic
and the next topic is object oriented
programming
so i'm going to open that index.php
right here
let's close the other things and open
that
on the right side as well oops
and let's create a class and an instance
in general
what is a class and what is an instance
the class
is a blueprint it is a template okay you
can also think
about it as a new data type okay
and out of which we can create the
variables of that data type
and that variables are called instances
or objects sometimes okay so whenever we
create
class we define some properties
and functionalities of that class and
then
the instances of that class will have
that properties
and functionalities okay for example if
i create a class of
person okay and that person has
a public property name
and public property surname
and private property age for example
okay so these are the properties of that
person class
and how can i create an instance of date
so i have to write here
person equals new
person okay so we have to use the new
keyword in the class name with
parentheses
and that creates that person class and
let's dump that person class
excuse me that is a person instance
created out of the person class
okay we can even call this just uh just
p
okay just p just like this one
so i just wanted to show you that the
variable name cannot
should not be the same it cannot be the
same it may not be the same
okay refresh and right here we see that
object person
with name surname and age which is
private property
okay what does this mean that it is a
public or private
so these are called access modifiers
there also exists
a third access modifier which is called
protected
which is more relevant when we see
inheritance
okay so i'm gonna set right now
the name and the surname of that person
class so i'm going to write here
p dot name equals
bread okay and p dot
surname equals traversing
okay let's save this and refresh in the
browser and we see that name
and surname is bread and traverse okay
so i can actually access each individual
property
right here and print that so echo
p name i want to print out the person
name
for example refresh and here we see
bread
okay so if i want to create
different uh persons with different
names so i have to repeat this code okay
p equals new person i'm going to call
this p2
okay and i have to specify right here a
different name
and surname john smith for example
okay and they will be
all of these instances of that person
class will have the
same properties but they might have
different values for that properties
okay it's very often used
to create a special function and use
that special function which is called
constructor
with the classes okay i'm going to
create a constructor right
here and specify
two arguments name and surname
so constructor is a special function
associated to the class
which is called executed immediately
when the instance of that class
is created okay in this case we create
an
instance two times right here
new person and right here new person we
call these two times
so every time we create an instance that
constructor function will be executed
okay and whatever arguments is given
inside that
uh creating instance right here
that will be passed down to the
constructor okay
so for example we can delete these two
lines
and pass bread and
traversey right here and bread will
become name
and traversing will become surname and i
can take that name and surname
and do some actions with that so i can
print if i want for example
name space surname
okay and refresh that we have couple of
other errors
uh okay this happens because on line 16
we are creating a person instance
and we don't give it a name and surname
let's comment these lines yet
refresh and we see bread traversing
which is printed from this line
okay instead of printing it's more
relevant to
save this information in a properties of
that class
so i'm going to use the keyword this
which basically
indicates to the instance on which
that constructor is called okay in this
case the constructor is called on a
person
p okay that's why this will correspond
to p so this dot name not dot but the
arrow
so this arrow basically is a
property operator so it's called a
property
operator so this is used to access to
the
properties and methods of an object okay
this name equals name
and this surname
equals surname so
we save that let's remove this echo we
save that
and refresh and we don't see any outputs
but if we print right here p
we will see that this is a person and it
has bread and
traverse okay so the given name and
surname was taken
and saved okay the class can also have
methods which are basically functions
associated to that class
so for example right here i'm going to
create a
public function a set
age which will accept an age as an
argument
take that age and we'll save in a
property okay very often when we have
private properties
we create setters and getters to set the
value for that private property
and get the value we cannot directly
access that private property
out of that class so if we try to write
p h equals
something i don't know 30
we're going to see an error because we
cannot access that
private property okay so we have to use
uh now a public function which we
created right here
public set age okay and we specify that
which will take that age variable and
save it in a
property so after this if i print the
person
we see that person has an age of 30.
and i can create another public function
get age which simply will return an
h so return this age
and this is called getter okay and now i
can print
p get age save
and refresh that and we see 30 right
here
okay let's uncomment now that second
person
and let's specify right here that john
smith in the constructor okay and we
have that second person
p2 save and refresh and here we have it
so now let's see static properties and
static methods
so i'm going to create right here public
static
counter okay which equals to zero
and whenever an instance is created
i'm going to increase the counter but
pay attention to this new keyword which
is called static
so static properties and static methods
belong to the class itself not the
instance
okay not the object created out of that
class
okay and if i want to access that static
counter i have to use
a self keyword self counter
plus plus so whenever we create an
instance
of that class we create we increase that
counter property
okay and i'm going to create right here
as static
function as well public static
function get counter
and i'm going to return self counter
okay and now down below when when we
created two instances of that person
class
i'm gonna print person class
counter okay so we access to static
properties
with this double double colon
okay save that and refresh and we see
two
which means that the counter is two
because two objects are created out of
that class which is quite
accurate let's call that gate counter
statically
using this double column save and
refresh and we see
two right here okay so there are much
more to explain about
the classes but i'm not going to cover
all of them right here because
this is not like the full course about
object oriented php okay these are just
basics
let's see a couple of other examples
like the inheritance
so i'm going to create a file inside
that
object oriented folder and call it
person very often when we have a class
that class is in its own separate file
so i'm going to take that person class
and move it in that file okay
so here we have it and
we can if we want to use that person
class
we have to include it or require it
right here
in this case the best example will be to
require once
right here not include not include ones
but
require ones so i'm including i'm
requiring that person
and this will work in the same way so we
have the same output right here
okay so i have uh
i should also mention that since php 7.4
we have possibility to specify the types
on the properties so for example i can
write that the
name is string surname is a string
and age is integer and we can also
specify that on counter that
it is an integer as well okay that is
because of php
7.4 so if i declare a
variable with the type int for example
and i want it to be
sometimes null values okay for example
when i
create the instance i want to specify
that this
age to be null this won't be possible
this is not possible
and we're going to see an error right
here that the age is an integer and you
cannot assign
now to it but if we put a question mark
in front of that
the type it means that this is an
integer
but it also accepts null values okay
so and if we do this the error will
disappear basically
okay so now i'm going to create a second
class
which i'm going to call student okay
and let's remove these things and i'm
going to extend
that student from person so i'm using
inheritance okay
so the student class is a child class of
the person
so first of all before we are using
right here's uh person class
we have to write require right here as
well
okay fine now
in index.php i want to include that
person
as well okay so not the person but the
student
excuse me okay here i created the
i'm going to comment the person code
okay
and i'm going to delete that as well and
i want to create now an
instance of the student okay
student equals new student
okay but pay attention one thing
right here phpstorm basically tells me
that required parameter name is missing
so because the student extends the
person
the student also has a constructor
inside its parent class person okay
and that constructor accepts name and
surname
so we have to specify name and surname
when we create an
instance of the student okay let's
create
bread uh traversing
okay so that will work the error
basically
will uh will not be displayed also
one important thing to notice is that uh
because we have right here require once
that's correct way and that's why we
don't see any error
if we change that into require now it
turns out
that we are requiring we need to also
change this right here
we are requiring person class twice
so right here we include we require that
person class
then we require student and then student
requires person
so if we have refresh in the browser we
see that error
cannot declare class person because the
name is
already in use okay that's why require
once
is the best example in this case
now let's say that i want to add couple
of other properties to the student for
example
public student id okay
and that's going to be string
now i want to pass that student id when
i create an instance
so right here i want to pass this
student id as well
so in the student constructor we want to
accept a third argument as well
so now i'm going to create a constructor
public function construct
and basically phpstorm autocompleted
this for me
and it's called the parent constructor
and the parent constructor
is person okay so but we need to accept
the third argument right here as well
which will be
student id okay and i want to take the
student id and save in this
student id okay and then call the parent
constructor and pass it
name and surname which will take and
save
its in its own name and certainly okay
so and one more thing i want to show you
is that
we can have protected properties as well
so this age property cannot be accessed
outside
of this person class it cannot be
accessed
right here it cannot be accessed right
here it cannot be even accessed
in the student class but if i change
that age property into protected
okay after this i can actually access
the
these in the student class so i can
write
this age equals to 18 for example
save and refresh and we don't see any
error
it works just fine and we can print that
student
right here save and refresh and here we
have it and we also have that age
protected which turns out to be null so
it is now because
we set right here 18 but in the parent
constructor
it is set to null so what we can do is
that first call the parent constructor
and then call our property sets and the
age property will be 18.
look at this however if that age
property is
private when i try to access right here
phpstorm also gives me an error about
that
but in the browser we we will see um
right here we should see an error we
don't actually see that error
okay let's see and i think that happens
because
it dynamically creates that private
property
okay so we cannot access that private
property outside of that person class
but right here it created its own
property
of that student okay so there is age
18 and age person
private this age comes from the person
and that
age belongs to that student
okay that's all about object oriented
programming as i mentioned it's a large
large topic and it can be covered in
this
short video so i really encourage you to
find out more about this there exists a
lot of
videos and a lot of resources to read
about that
okay let's move on on the next topic
the next topic is crl c url so i'm going
to
remove this and close all of that
index.php and let's open crl
on the right side as well so here we
have it
so generally what is crl crl
is a tool which gives you possibility to
interact uh
remotely to other services to other
resources
okay so for example i want to get the
information
from the following url so i i'm gonna
use
serial for that we we have already seen
that i can actually get
the users uh from that url using file
git contents right
but sometimes file gate contents is
blocked in terms of
some security policies
okay and filegate contents also cannot
be used if we want to pass
some additional headers to the request
or if we want to post some information
it can be used for that
okay this is the place where we need to
use c url
so i'm going to use c url init function
to start this url and i'm going to
specify right here the url
that i want to start it on the following
url
and this finally creates a resource and
returns that resource
okay so we have seen at the beginning
when i was explaining variables right
here that we have
seven variable types like the the
following ones
and we explored these five immediately
and later
we explored arrays we explored objects
about object-oriented programming the
instances are basically objects
and here is the resource the resource
basically is the following
thing okay which is returned from this
url
okay so we created that resource and now
we want to uh set a couple of options on
that resource so i'm going to use
crl set opt function specify the
resource on which i want to
set the option i'm going to specify also
constant crl opt return
transfer and that corresponds to true
so basically on that resource i set
the following key to be true and after
this
i'm going to call crl exec which makes
the execution on the resource
and returns the result okay
that's the user's json and we can
immediately print that result save
and refresh in the browser and here we
see that
result so view page source and right
right here we have it
okay so if we want to get the status
code
of that we need to use crl get
info function and specify the resource
okay
so if we just call that function just
like this one
this returns a lot of information
and we can print that and have a look
refresh and we have a lot of information
right here the url
and the content type and the header size
and the http code and so on
okay but when we call this url getinfo
we can also specify
serial info http code
okay h c url what's wrong
crl info
http code okay this one
and finally this is the response code so
i'm going to call it
code save and refresh and right here we
see that response code
okay so when we make a serial execution
and get the result
then we need to call serial close okay
crl close let's provide the resource
after we call that serial resource we
cannot actually get
any info on this url so this code is
okay and it works
but if i put that url close before that
serial info
right here this code returns basically
boolean false
because the resource is already closed
and we cannot read that
okay so now i'm going to make
a post request on that endpoint to
create the user in the following api
okay so for this i'm going to create crl
init
again and in this case i don't pass the
url i'm going to show you a different
approach
this returns a resource okay
then i'm going to call crl set opt
we have set opt and we have set opt
array so in this case i'm going to
specify set opt eram provide the
resource
and array is the second argument okay
and right here i'm going to specify
serial
opt a url so the url on which i want to
make request
is the following okay crl opt
return transfer indicates true which
means that i want to actually get the
response
okay crl opt
post so i have to specify that this
needs to be a post
because i'm going to create a new user
okay serial opt post fields
are the user which i want to actually
create
okay now i'm going to create a sample
user or i'm going to copy and paste that
sample user and it's going to be an
associative array
like this one and inside the post fields
i'm going to specify
json encode user
okay so this is the user i want it to be
created
and after this i call crl exec
pass the resource and that finally
creates
the resource and this returns also
result okay and we can close this url
see where i'll close on the resource
and we can print out the following
result which will be the user
created in that api save and refresh
and down below somewhere right here
let's comment the other code
okay comment the following
refresh and here we see that
so this basically is
okay what is this actually so this is
no this is not correct so yeah one thing
i
missed right here is the http header so
right here we get
ver very weird response okay that's
because we haven't specified
the http header so we have to specify
right here
serial opt uh http header
okay we need to tell the api that the
content i'm sending to you
is json okay so we have to specify right
here in
array content uh
content type i'm specifying right here
is application slash
json okay and comma right here
okay so using this i'm telling that i'm
sending you a json
let's save and refresh and right here we
see that user so
we'll page source and this is the user
which was created in that api in that
json placeholder rest api okay
and the id was assigned to that user
which is 11.
okay so again serial is very powerful
tool and
can be used for many purposes it can be
used for uploading files downloading
files
uh for passing some authentication and
so on
okay there are a lot of tools built on
uh crl and i encourage you to check out
more about this
and find out okay so let's move on on
the next
thing which will be already a project
and we're going to create
product crud application and we're going
to do this
three times okay so first we're going to
create this
with the easiest possible way with the
knowledge we got
so far okay we're going to learn also
many many things during building this
project like working with the forums
uploading files and so on and after this
we're gonna
re change our code modify our our code
and make it more
optimal and much better than it was in
the first
version and then we're going to learn
also a couple of other things like
autoloading and composer
and using that tools using object
oriented programming
we're going to come up to custom routing
and mini
music framework and we're gonna build
our product screwed
based on that it's gonna be the best
among
all these three versions of the project
okay let's start and first we have to
create
database in mysql and we have to create
products table so i'm going to open
right now
phpmyadmin
which is a web-based client for mysql
and we have to create
database so on the left side right here
we have existing databases
so i have a little bit more probably you
have if you have a fresh new
installation of xampp
so let's just create new one hit that
new
right here let's just call this products
underscore crowd and i'm going to choose
utf-8 mb4 unicode ci
which works best for me in all in all
cases like so let's just create this
and we have to create also table for
products so i'm going to call the table
products
and i'm going to add six columns right
here
and hit go so the first column which
will be id
that's going to be an integer and i'm
going to tick right here that it is an
auto
increment so it will also pick up the
index primer so that's going to be our
primary key
of the table we're going to have title
which will be
varchar okay and let's give it 512
maximum length
and that should be required so i'm not
going to tick that checkbox okay it
should be unticked
so we're gonna have description as well
which will be
a long text or text let's pick up long
long text
so let let's give it a long text
okay and right here i'm gonna make this
optional okay
take the checkbox we're going to also
have image
which will be a varchar of 2048
and i'm going to make this optional as
well and
we're going to have also price of the
product
which i'm going to make decimal of
probably ten by two okay and this is the
maximum okay let's give it 10 by two
but the price should be required and i'm
gonna
create the last column which will be
create date so whenever we add the
product
list will be picked up and saved in the
database automatically
so i'm gonna set this datetime
okay so here we have let's have a quick
overview
everything looks good
okay so scroll down and i'm gonna hit
the save
okay so the table was actually created
okay
now let's create a couple of records
right there
so i'm going to go into insert and the
id will be picked up automatically so
i'm going to leave this empty
in title i'm going to write iphone 11
for example this is the first
product we are adding in the description
i'm going to leave
empty the image i'm going to leave empty
in the price i'm going to write
2 000 for example and the date basically
i'm going to set this to
current current date okay let's add
second for example galaxy oops
galaxy s20
i'm gonna leave description and image
empty the price pay basically will be
following and let's choose the current
date
and let's just say this so if we go in
the browse
we see these two records in the database
okay
perfect now let's start implementing our
crowd application
so i'm going to open right here
that 14 product crud
and let's open now php store i'm going
to
open this on a full screen as well and
start
so right here this is the index.php and
whenever we open that index.php
we would like to see the product list
okay including image title and price
the description might be very large so
let's don't display the description in
the list
so i'm going to right now use bootstrap
for
user interface okay so let's open
getbootstrap.com
go to the documentation scroll down
and i'm going to choose that starter
template
copy this one and paste in the index.php
okay so we don't actually need
uh which version is this by the way
so yeah this this looks good so yeah we
don't need javascript
actually we're not going to use that so
i'm going to remove all script tags from
here
we will need css to make it a little bit
nicer
and i'm going to change the title into
[Music]
products crud okay
now we need to display table right here
okay so i'm gonna choose a table design
also from here scroll down and i'm gonna
pick the very first one
and paste right here let's format the
code
and let's open this index.php in the
browser and have a look
so this is how it looks like obviously
we don't have the
bootstrap css included properly
okay let's inspect and see
what's going on refresh that
okay something is wrong so let css
is not included
refuse to apply stance because the mime
type application xml is not supported
stylesheet
very strange let's open this in a new
tab
okay i think bootstrap has
some bugs at the moment
okay so let's search for or let's just
download the css
but let's search for cdn bootstrap cdn
that
should actually work
so right here let's pick the following
the following link and
paste this right here
okay let's refresh it
and here we have it so something was
wrong with that link which we just
grabbed from the
bootstraps official documentation i
don't know why to be honest
but yeah we have the results so this is
the product squad
so i'm going to also create up css right
here
and put there just a little bit of
padding
on the body padding 50 pixel
let's save it and i'm going to include
that
right here link
to be
up css cool so we have that little bit
of padding
okay perfect now what we need to do is
to make a query in the database right
here
select that products and display in the
table
and of course we have to adjust the
columns which are displayed right here
okay so let's first make a connection to
the database
and select that products okay and just
dump and to have a look
okay so again i want to highlight that
we are
right now building a version
which uh very beginner would build
okay so we have to go with the easiest
possible ways and the easiest possible
way right now is to create php tags
right here
and make a connection to the database
okay so
we're gonna use pdo for this so
pdo basically there are two ways to make
connection to the database one is mysqli
and second is pdo i really encourage you
to go with pdo because
it is more powerful it supports multiple
databases
it is object oriented and there are a
couple of other advantages
okay so how we can connect to the
database we have to create an
instance of the pdo class
so pdo is new pdo and i'm going to
specify a couple of arguments right here
first is dsn string which defines the
connection string of the database
so i'm going to specify that i want to
connect to
mysql database okay the host
where i'm going to connect is localhost
okay we have mysql installed
locally okay the port i'm going to
connect
is 3306 this is the default port of
mysql
okay and that port is also displayed in
xampp control panel
okay we have to also specify the
database name on which i want to connect
and we called our database to be
product squad so i'm gonna write here
products products
products crud
okay so this is the first argument which
is called dsn string
and the second argument is the user
so the user on the xampp installation in
most cases in all cases basically
is root and the password for windows is
an empty password
so using this we actually already
establish
a connection to the database but we need
to tell pdo what should do
if the connection was not successfully
done okay
so i'm going to specify right here on
pdo set attribute
and we have to specify pdo
at arrow mode which means the attribute
of
error mode to be pdo
air mode exception okay so when there is
some error during that connection just
throw
an exception okay so let's just save
this
and refresh the browser and if we don't
see any error
this means that the connection was
successfully established we're gonna
show this so refresh we don't see
anything which means that we're good
but if i change the name of the database
okay
so let's add like s one more is right
here
save and refresh and here we see unknown
database
products with double s crud
okay so this tells us that we
successfully connected to the database
now we need to make a query in the
database and select all the products
okay so on pdo
we have to call prepare okay we can
actually do this using
exec but it's not very uh good way and
very like best practice okay
so exec is more recommended to make some
changes in the database schema
okay if we want to select let's always
use prepared
statements so in the prepared statement
i'm going to specify
the query select everything from
products and let's just order them
by the create date in descending okay
order by create
underscore date descending okay
so this prepare method finally returns
a statement okay which is an instance of
pdo statement
and on that statement we can actually
call
execute which will make that keyword in
the database
and then on that statement we can call
fetch all
method and we have to specify right here
how i would like to fetch that
okay and i'm going to specify fetch
assault which means that
i want each record inside the table
to be fetched as an associative array
okay and let's save that in a variable
of products
and i'm going to dump this right here
that products array and let's have a
look in the browser
so here we have it so we have an array
of two elements
okay and we have two records in the
database as well
and each of the element is an
associative array
of uh id the column name and the value
so id is one title is iphone 11
description and image are now
price is this create data this and here
is for the second one
okay now we just need to iterate over
each element
and just display them in the table okay
so let's remove this for dump scroll
down where we have the table
and first let's adjust the columns so
let's put image first
and put then title
then put we don't need description so
let's just put
price let's put right here create
date as well and put their actions
column
where we're going to put edit and delete
buttons
okay so we have totally six columns
in the first column we display just the
index of that product
okay now we need to iterate the products
we just
selected right here and display them
properly
okay right here where we have these tr
elements three tier elements which is
copied and pasted from bootstrap
let's just leave one and we need to put
that tr
in the for each okay so
let's just cut this and write php
for each okay so we have to specify
uh products i want to iterate over
products and i'm gonna
call each individual product name of
product and right here we're gonna
output the tr
which i just copied but i'm gonna
right here close the php tag
okay right here and i'm gonna start new
tag
oops right here okay so
in between these four each start and for
each end
i can write in html okay
if i just save this in refresh in the
browser
we see two records the same ones
so that happens because we have two
products the four each loop iterates two
times
and it displays the same tr okay i'm
going to show you also second way how
you can write for each which is
generally what i prefer and i generally
write
like this okay so we put column right
here
okay and down below i'm going to write
end
for each so this is generally how i
write inside
html files the for each okay but
you can choose the previous one the this
one if you prefer
okay so perfect now we need to display
index right here so let's take out the
index of this for each loop
so i'm going to call right here i and
the i basically is an index and the
product is the product
and right here we just output
i plus one because the iteration starts
with zero
and we don't want zero to be displayed
in the first column
we want it to start with one okay in the
second column
we display the title okay so the product
each product
is an associative area so we just access
the title of that product so i'm going
to delete these two lines and just
duplicate this few times
we need right here excuse me the first
we need image and then title
so we have not actually implemented
image yet so i'm going to
leave this td empty then we display
title
then we display price then we display
create underscore date and right here we
should display two buttons
one for edit and second for delete
okay so let's go to the bootstrap
documentation for buttons
and right here we can choose the buttons
we prefer i'm gonna go with outline
buttons the following ones so i'm going
to copy the very first one
and paste right here and i'm going to
call this
edit and i'm going to just duplicate
this
and change the primary into
danger and call this delete
okay so let's just save this and
have a look in the browser refresh
and here we see the products okay the
image is empty
index and title and everything is
displayed properly
i'm going to change the button size into
smaller ones i don't want that large
buttons
btn sm save refresh perfect
okay let's go ahead and add one more
product and i'm going to call this
iphone
se probably let's give it a price
okay and let's give it date as well
and click the go and it was inserted
refresh it and here we see that s e as a
very first one
because we are just sorting this in a
descending order now
let's implement creating a form
create form of the product so
first let's add create button right here
above the table
so i'm going to create a paragraph and
inside the paragraph i'm going to create
a button
which will have a class of btn btn
success these are just bootstrap classes
and i'm going to call this create so
have a look
here we have so let's just call it
create product
and we have to also change this into an
anchor link instead of a button
because we're gonna add ahref right
there and
i'm gonna put right here create.php
okay so whenever we click on that link
it should open
create.php so if i click right now
it's tells me not found because that
create php doesn't exist
so let's just create that so
right here we need that create.php
okay inside that create.php we have to
uh include that bootstrap and everything
basically
regarding styling what we have in
index.php
okay so we are doing this as a beginner
and the main thing for us is to achieve
the final goal
and have it working so and let's just
copy everything
in from index into create okay and
adjust couple of things so we will need
connection to the database
um so but we don't need to select the
product so i'm going to remove that
select
we will need that stylings
in bootstrap and up css and that should
the title should be basically create new
product okay let's just do like this
and we need instead of a table right
here we need a form
okay so let's open bootstrap
documentation
and search for four okay scroll down
this is the very basic example of the
form i'm gonna copy this
and paste right here format the code and
have a look in the browser
so here we have that create new product
but we need to adjust that form elements
right
so i'm going to remove that for and id
and make this as simple as possible so
we don't want
id i'm going to remove that oops
i'm going to remove that area described
by
so this thing so i'm going to remove
that id
or we just don't need that small at all
so this is going to be email no
this is going to be a product title
okay and this should be input type
text and we need to give it a name as
well but i'm going to leave this without
names to show you one important thing
so then i'm going to just delete
everything and
copy and paste this
okay few more times so one will be for
title second will be for uh
actually the first one should be product
image which will be
input type file then we're gonna have
title
then we're gonna have description
uh which should be text area it should
not be input
okay then in the texture it doesn't need
that type
then we're gonna have product price and
that is basically all
the product price should be number okay
and i'm gonna give it also step
0.01
okay so that the price of the product
can be
can include decimal uh numbers as well
like
5.25 or something like this okay
so let's have a look in the browser so
this is the product image and
let's just remove the form control
on the input type file we don't need
that
refresh so and we put br
right here so that's good enough so we
have that so we have product title
description
price and that is basically all okay so
whenever
we hit the submit we want to get that
submitted information and create a
product
in the database in the mysql okay
how to do that so right now if i click
the submit
it actually submits the form but nothing
happens
okay in the form we have to specify
two attributes so the action
defines where the form needs to be
submitted
and in our case we're going to submit on
the same file
so the create php should be where the
data should be sent
okay if we want the same file to be used
for submitting we can even put this
and leave it empty okay and the second
attribute is method
generally when we crea when we create or
update or delete something in the
database
we should do this using method post okay
it is much more secure and i'm going to
show you the difference between get
and post first let's leave it get
and by default if you just don't provide
the method attribute
it is get so let's leave it get and
just hit the submit and nothing
basically happens
so that because the input fields does
not
have names whenever we submit that
the form takes the names of the input
fields and that's why we have to specify
write your names
and that's going to be image this
will be title this will be
description and this will be price
save it refresh and now when i hit the
submit
look at this in the url so right here we
see
question mark image equals
then in symbol title equals
n symbol description equals n symbol and
price equals and that's the end so
this what is this so this is called very
often query string
i'm going to copy and paste this right
here and just
explore this okay so here we have it
and keyword string starts with question
marks so we don't need that question
mark
and qr string basically is key value
peers
separated by that end statement so in
our case the key is the image and the
value is empty string
okay so right here we don't have any
value for image so it is an empty string
then we have an end symbol and then we
have title
equals to an empty string and
description
equals to an empty string and price
equals to empty string
so if i just put some information right
here okay
so for example um i don't know
one plus one plus
description some description and let's
provide some price
hit the submit button and look at this
so in the url right now
we don't see empty strings let's paste
this right here
we see image is empty but title is
one plus and description is some
description
and price is one two three okay
so this is how we can possibly get
information and this is um
the in basically when you pass
information using method get
which we specified right here the data
is displayed in the url
so that's why if you want to pass some
sensitive information like the username
and password
when you do a login form you should not
use get
you should also not use get when you
want to make some changes in the
database
the get using get will be a good example
if you want to make a search form for
example so you make a search form and
we're going to do that search form
also in that products crowd application
and you'd make with with the
method get and basically in the url
there will be written the search keyword
and that's it so the advantage of having
search uh inside the uh inside the qr
string
or making the search form using method
get
is that it is in the url okay
so when you submit the form using get
the parameters are in the url
and if you just copy and paste that url
and send it to someone else
he or she can see the same information
what you are seeing
okay for a post nothing is added in the
url nothing is displayed in the url
okay so we need to do this with the
method post but if i do this
but before i do this i'm going to show
you um
the information how i can get the
information from the gate
so i'm going to use a super global get
so in php there are a couple of super
globals
and all of the super globals have the
following syntax
so they are variables like they start
with the dollar sign
and they uh in the naming they have
underscore
and then some name like cookie session
server get and so on in this case we
went to
get okay so let's dump everything from
the get
save and refresh and right here i see
all the
sent information which we also see in
the url
okay so if i change something and right
here print
image is equal test dot png for example
we see that imagetest.pngb png
is just provided right here as well if i
remove
title from here and hit the enter
title also disappears okay basically
everything what is displayed in the qr
string after the question mark
is get and you can get that information
from the super global
get okay but as i mentioned in this case
we want method post so
i'm going to change this into post okay
so
now i'm going to remove this question
mark and keyword string
and basically get is empty at the moment
and now i'm going to print post
so underscore post let's fill up the
form
this is going to be one plus
some description sum price
hit the enter and here we see the post
information
okay that's perfect now we want to take
that
and save in the database but we also
want to pass
image okay so let's first do this
without
image and then add an image there okay
so we have title description price uh
title and price are
absolutely mandatories so we can
actually
validate if the title and price is not
provided
then we're going to throw an error okay
so
we would like to take that information
title description and price
and send it to the database how to get
that
so we have all this information in the
post so we want to take that from
post so i'm going to create right here
title
equals post a title
okay i want to take out the title from
post and
we also want to take description
from post and we want
also to take price from post
so we have that information and now
we're going to make an
insert in the database so for this we
create
prepared statement using prepare method
on pdo
so we write insert into
products okay we want to insert
in the following columns title
image description
and price and create date
okay we want to insert in these columns
and we have to right here specify what's
going to be the values
when we're going to make an insert okay
so values
needs to be some sort of strings
okay very often beginners take that
values which are submitted
and put directly right here okay
so imagine that the title is one plus
okay or just make it very simple and let
the title be test
okay so the test needs to be passed
right here
okay and it must be written in the
single quotations okay
like test something like this and the
same thing happens for
image and right now we don't implement
image
at the moment so i'm going to leave this
empty string and the description needs
to be some description
and the price needs to be some price
okay
and we also need date by the way which
should be the current date
okay we're going to implement the date
as well but
we have to put right here variables
instead of these hard-coded strings
okay so very often as i mentioned
beginners take the values
and directly put this right here okay
so we we are using right here double
quotations
so we can use the variables inside the
string
okay for image we leave empty for
description
we can write the description for price
we can write the price as for the date
we can create a separate variable for
that date
which is the current date and we're
going to format the current date
as the mysql needs so mysql needs in the
following format vr
month day hour minute
minute and second okay and i'm gonna
pass this date
in single quotations as well because
when we make an insert in the database
everything must be a string well the
price must not be string it can be
it because it is a decimal it can be
just like this
without that single quotations okay
so we have it prepare and basically we
don't
so here is important thing so if we do
like this
and very often as i mentioned like the
beginners do like this
they also run with exec so this exact
take
takes the following query and directly
runs it in the database and if i execute
this
we're gonna already see a record in the
database
so let's just save this and refresh
so continue resubmit the form
and have a look in the database and here
we see that oneplus with description and
image as an empty string and the price
and the date
so everything looks good so why we
should not do
this approach okay so the reason
is that just putting the concatenating
that variable with the qr string is very
unsafe
okay because whoever is filling up your
form
may provide sql injection code
and that can cause dropping of your
whole table
or deleting some data or things like the
bad things
okay so we should not do modifications
of the uh database data
using this exact method and using this
concatenation
okay whenever we get some data from the
user
and we want to put that user in the
database
we have to use prepared statements so
i'm going to
right here right here change this into
prepare
okay and that's going to be insert into
products with the following columns
and instead of values right here
and that should be by the way called
values okay so
i'm going to call i'm going to create
named parameters okay that's the feature
of pdo
so column title is the first name
parameter
column image is the second column
description is third column price
and column date so all these are
named parameters and finally this
prepares the statement
and returns that
okay so what do we need to do right now
so we need to save this
in a statement variable
and on that statement i'm going to call
bind value method okay
so in the bind value i just provide the
named parameter
for example title and the value i want
to buy
instead of that main named parameter
okay
so i'm telling to pdo statement that hey
the title named parameter is the
following value
okay and we have to repeat the same
thing for
others like image in this case
is an empty string we're going to
implement this in a moment
so description is
description we need price
as well and
date that should be the following
variable okay after this we
run execute method on the statement
and finally this makes a change in the
database
writes an insert in the database and
that's basically all
so if i just refresh the form
right here and have a look in the
database
we can see that oneplus second time
right here
so if i continue refreshing this okay
the records will be made in the database
okay
but our code is not perfect
simply because if we just try to open
that form
it prints a lot of errors and
why does this happen okay so i'm gonna
pause right here
and think about it why does this happen
okay this happens because
we don't have anything in the post the
post basically is empty
so when we are opening that form the
title
description price on the following lines
seven
eight and nine all of them are empty
okay and even more the method
on which we're opening that page is get
okay that's why the whole post is empty
okay and we can dump the whole post and
have a look right here
dump the whole post i'm gonna exit right
here as well
refresh and this is our post okay so
what do we need to do we need to check
if the request method was posed then we
need to
take the data from the post how to check
what is the current request method is it
a post
or is it a get we have to use super
global
server so i'm going to dump the server
right now
and exit so let's have a look this is
our server
and if we observe this server contains a
lot of information okay
it contains the mysql home directory php
version uh the current user agent
which browser we are using and many many
other information okay the operating
system
information and so on what we need to do
right here
is method so let's search for method and
here we have
request method and this indicates that
the method
is get so if i just remove exit right
here
and refresh so the method is get
we don't see anything right here simply
because
we have some fatal errors okay but if we
submit that form
the request method will be post okay so
we need to do something like
this so if super global
servers request method
equals to post only in this case
take the title description price from
the post
and make an insert in the database okay
we need to do this only if the request
method is post
so now if we open that form
and remove that server variable
if we open that form we don't see any
error okay
so if i open that form it looks good and
it also doesn't make any
records in the database because this is
written inside an if statement and the
request method
is get in this case but let's just print
the request method
okay server request method right
here let's put here as well and let's
just submit the form
so title description price hit the enter
and here we see that now request method
is post
and in the database we should also see
one more record
and here we have title description and
the price
okay so this works also very
well we need to make validations also
so if the title or price is not provided
we have to print the error okay so how
to do that
so we need we can just easily check if
the title
is not does not exist basically if the
title is an empty string
it is a falsible value okay and if
uh the title is an empty string that
if we'll be satisfied because we have a
not right here okay
so if the title is empty string and we
just write if title
so this if won't be satisfied if i put
right here not
in this case it will be satisfied so if
the title is an empty string
in this case we need to write some error
okay so like the product title is
required okay
and we need to do the same thing for
price so we can have several errors
and right now i'm going to create errors
array okay and whenever
i have that errors i'm going to display
that errors array
at the top of the form right here okay
so right here i'm gonna put
a bootstrap alert okay that should be
div
with alert class alert
danger okay and i'm going to iterate
over errors php for each
errors as error and i'm going to
end for each use the end for each syntax
php end for each and i'm going to
display right here
a div with the error message
okay just like this one so let's just
write
here if title is not provided
errors inside the errors let's just push
please provide the product title or just
product
title is required okay
and we need to do the same thing for
price so if price is not provided
inside the errors let's just push
product
price is
required okay let's just save this and
submit the empty form so we open that
empty
form and here we have another error that
happens on line
50. that happens because right here we
are using errors
but it is not actually described
okay so we have that error description
describing the error
inside if statement if the request
method is post
so we just need to put this at the very
top
so i can write these things immediately
at the very top but i want to show you
the problems beginners come across
and then how to solve these problems
okay
so just i knew when i wrote errors right
here that there would be an error
down below but i just want to make
mistakes
and then fix them okay so we have errors
right here
and let's just remove this uh request
method we don't need we understood how
to print the request method
now if we have a look okay we don't see
the error but we see that
empty red background area which is not
good
right and we see this because we are
always displaying the alert even though
the errors
array is empty okay so we can write an
if statement
if errors is empty and we can use
empty method for that if errors is not
empty more correctly if errors is not
empty display the following
alert and down below we need end if okay
just like we are using and for each we
can use and if if we are using that
column syntax okay save
refresh and looks good okay when we open
the form
we don't see anything extra now if i hit
the submit button
i see both of the errors product title
is required
product price is required and
but still the record is made in the
database
because we have not actually wrote
written the corresponding code
okay so when we set errors right here we
need to check
if errors is empty only in this case
make an insert in the database okay
so if errors is empty let's just use the
empty function only in this case make an
insert in the database
and now if i just hit the submit button
and have a look in the database
it doesn't make inserts in the database
okay
perfect if i provide something in the
title okay
test product and hit the submit button
i see one error only about product price
okay and it also does not make recording
the database
which is very good which is exactly what
we want
okay so if i provide both like the
product
title and product price it will
uh it will make an insert in the
database but one important thing as well
so if i just don't provide the product
price and hit the submit
the product price which i uh the product
title which i
entered right here simply disappears
okay
so we need management for that as well
okay so we just want the title to be
displayed right here
so how to do that so we have title
description and price variables right
here
so if we can just use them right
down below when we render the form and
assign the value back
so if i just write value equals
php echo title so let's just write
title back inside that product height
okay so if i refresh this right here
i see that product title is displayed
but this code has some error
so it is not very good solution
doing just like this and i'm gonna pause
right here
for several seconds think about it what
problem this might have
and then see my solution
okay the problem is that if i just open
that form
using method get i see that our
undefined variable title
because again the title is described
inside that
if statement and we are accessing right
here
when it is not actually described
yet so we're doing to do is that let's
create a variable title with an empty
string right here
okay and that should fix the problem
okay we don't see this anymore
and let's do the same thing for price
as an empty string and for description
okay now let's just use that price and
description
down below as well so inside the text
area
we're gonna display description and down
below inside the price
we're gonna display the price okay now
if i provide price but don't provide the
title hit the submit button
i still see that price is provided and
if i just provide also some description
and hit the submit button
both of them stays there it only
complains about the title okay
so the validations are also done which
is very good
now what we need to do is to upload the
file
okay so how to do it so let's choose
one file so let's go to the pictures
php course and i'm going to choose right
here that
image and hit that submit button but of
course it won't do anything because we
don't handle uploading an image
okay so now it's time to introduce
a one more super super global variable
which is called files okay
super global variable files contains
all the uploaded files so i'm going to
exit right here stop execution
for the rest of the code and let's just
have a look at the
files so also one important notice so if
i just submit that form
my files will be empty in order to be
able to upload the files
we need to add an attribute to that
form okay and that attribute should be
ink type multipart form data
okay using this basically i'm telling
the form that
i'm gonna submit files okay so
let's open the create form let's
actually
uh comment that
yet open the form i'm going to choose
the file
and then i'm going to uncomment this and
hit the submit
and here we see the uploaded file okay
it has
key of file image and that key basically
is what we gave in the form
right here okay this is the key and the
value is an array of
uh key value peers it's an associative
array
this is the original name of the of the
image we uploaded
this is the mime type this is the tmp
name
and this tmp name is basically what we
need to use
so whenever you upload a file apache
saves this in the temporary directory
okay
and this is where apache saved that
uploaded file
so you have one request to move that
file into
a permanent permanent storage permanent
folder
and then the file will be deleted okay
so right now in this request when we
upload the file
we have to take from the temp name and
move it somewhere else
okay and that means that we successfully
uploaded
that file okay and this is the file size
so whenever we move this somewhere we
have to
also put in the database the location
of the image so that we can use that
location when
rendering products in the list okay
so how to do that we need to also
associate
somehow that this image is connected
to a vet product not only
uh in the database level in the column
but on the file system level as well
so let's start with very easy steps and
let's just
directly move that uploaded file to
somewhere okay so
for example if there are no errors if we
hold if we don't have any
errors about the title and uh price
let's just put right here uh uploading
an image okay
so first we need to check if the image
was actually uploaded
it is an optional and it might not be
uploaded right
so we get image from super global
files for key image okay
but if that image is not presented
in the super global files let's just
take the image to be now
okay then we need to check if the image
is
not null if the image exists
so we have to save that image somewhere
okay
so for this i'm going to use move
uploaded file function
we have to specify from where we want to
move
that uploaded file and this is gonna be
the path
okay so it's gonna be the image tmp name
okay the tnp name
so from image tmp name we want to
move it somewhere else so for now i'm
just gonna move it into
test.png okay or jpg
let's let's just make it jpg because it
is actually jpg
okay so this is how i'm gonna do this
and i'm gonna exit right here okay
i don't want uh the record to be
inserted in the database
i just want the uploaded file to be
saved on the file system
okay so let's just save this and refresh
we have exit above so i'm going to
remove it exit
refresh and let's have a look on the
left
right here we should see that
uploaded image but we don't see for some
reason because the errors is not
empty okay so because errors is not
empty we just don't see so let's just
provide
title and surprise
hit the submit let's just choose the
file also
hit the submit and right here we see
that
test.jpg and that is the file we just
uploaded
okay so perfect now what we can do is
that
put write that information test.png in
the database
but this is not perfect
you know why because two products
might have uploaded files with the same
name
okay and the latest one will overwrite
this one okay
so when we upload the file we need to
make sure that
the path of that file should be unique
for that product and won't be the same
for
another one or it will just overwrite
okay
this is another mistake many beginner
developers actually make
so they just upload that file so we can
even do like this
so this is the product and this is the
actual name of the image we are
uploading
so instead of putting this in test png
many beginners
put this in its own original name
like the or image name okay
save it and whenever i refresh that form
it's uploaded on the following with the
following name
okay and that should actually belong to
that specific product
what we are creating right now but the
thing is that if we just create
another product and upload the same
image
the second uploading will overwrite this
one
okay which is not very good okay which
is not correct i would say
so we have to make sure that we save
that image in a unique path for that
product
so one solution is to wait
until we save that product in the
database
take that product id okay
create a folder and give it an id
as a name of the folder and put the
image
inside that folder so we are sure that
every product has a unique id
and we will have unique folders for that
product
and we can have each image of that
inside that folder or we can even
call our image the product id
dot png or dot jpg whatever it will be
but in this case we have to wait until
that product
is saved take the id save that on the
file system
and then we have to also update the
image
inside the database because in the
database we need to
write what is the actual path of that
product
okay so that to get that later
so another common behavior is to
generate
a random name folder
and put the image inside that random
name folder
okay so how to actually do this
so we need to create a
function basically for generating a
random string
okay so let's do the following approach
okay so i'm actually going to copy and
paste that function so
and i'm going to explain of course so
i'm going to paste that function
right here random string and let's have
a look
so we have characters right here from 0
to 9 from a to z
and from uppercase a to uppercase z okay
and we want to generate random string
out of these characters and we pass in
as a length of that string okay i want
to generate
in length random string so what do we do
so we iterate from 0 to n and we call
a random function rand function
from 0 to the length of that string
okay so the rand function accepts
minimum
and maximum okay this is the maximum
and creates uh generates a random number
for in in between these interval like
the minimum and the maximum
and we are sure that when we run this
random
with zero and str length of characters
minus one
it will pick an index uh from zero
to the length of the string okay and
then
we take the actual character from the
characters based on the index
okay so if random index will be i don't
know
whatever is the index of the c then c
character will be picked up
and it will be concatenated to the
string
str variable and save back inside the
str
then another random character will be
picked up for example the uppercase c
and it will be concatenated to the c
itself and so on
okay and using this approach we actually
have possibility
to generate a random string with the
given length
so i'm going to use that random string
right here above
okay before actually calling that move
uploaded file
okay so right here we're gonna write
to how to make an actual uh
like the random directory so i'm gonna
do like this
i'm gonna make all images inside an
images folder right here okay just don't
create the random directories
immediately right here
okay but create an images folder so to
have them all together
okay so i'm gonna write if image is
uploaded
then or we can do this even out there
so right here so if the directory
doesn't exist images directory okay
if that doesn't exist i'm going to put
not right here
then create images
directory okay so whenever the following
code is executed
the very first time actually so right
here we don't have that
images folder it will create that images
folder
okay okay very well so now
down below we have to actually uh
create that random directory so how to
do that
and we have to also create the image
path
so image path
will be so where the actual image should
be saved
and that's going to be images inside the
images folder
random string for the length of 8
and then we're gonna provide the actual
uploaded
image name okay that's going to be the
image path
and let's just dump the following image
path
and have a look and i'm going to exit
right here
save and refresh and here we see that
image path so
inside images folder inside that random
directory
this is going to be the image okay if i
refresh this i see that
random directory actually changes okay
right here so we are sure that
this will be unique so it's there's very
small chance to create to generate
two random strings of length eight with
the same
um like the sequence of the characters
okay there's
very small chance for that so we are
creating a
unique path for that image okay
and that image path can be used down
below
when making insert in the database
okay so i'm going to specify image path
right here
however that image path is also created
inside the if statement right here okay
and if the image is not uploaded on the
following line
we're going to see an error that the
image path does not exist
so let's just create that image path
right here equals to an empty string
okay
now i'm going to create a folder with
this
random string path and then upload
image inside so i'm going to use mkdir
again
and specify right here dear name
function so the dname function accepts
the file path
and returns the directory where that
file path is located
so i'm going to specify image path which
is the following image
and it will return the following path so
we have to create
directory with the following path and
when we do this we can
already run the move uploaded file
but right here we need to specify actual
image path
where we want to upload that image and
save that
and refresh and have a look
so something um
is actually wrong no nothing is wrong
let's have a look in the database
refresh it
and right here we see that image okay so
this is the product
and here we have that image and if we
have a look
in the file system on the left side we
see
images folder inside images folder we
see that
random name and inside that random name
we see that
image which we just uploaded okay so i'm
gonna delete
that files okay
and that is basically all about creating
a creating product
okay the last thing what we need to do
is to
redirect user to the index page
when the product is actually created
okay
so for this i'm gonna use header
function
and i'm going to specify the header
which basically points to
redirect so location header corresponds
to
index.php okay let's just redirect user
to the index.php
and save that and go to the product
squad
let's just remove it files we don't need
that
and let's just create one product
okay galaxy note 20
okay with some description with optional
description
with some price okay and let's choose
image as well and hit the submit
and we we are redirected to the index
page and we see galaxy note 20 right
here
if we have a look in the database we see
that it has also image
however if i create one product without
an image we should not see that okay
so refresh right here and
here we have another problem so we
basically see
that images slash and the folder
so which is not correct so we have a
problem we need to fix that okay
and this actually happens because that
image
was actually existed okay so if i dump
that image right here
okay and exit immediately
okay let's go to the products page and
create test product with price hit the
enter and this is our image
so even though we didn't choose image it
still
exists with everything empty but it
still exists
so we need to check right here if image
exists
and the image also has
tmp name in this case let's run the
following code
okay so let's just remove this for dump
and refresh it let's have a look in the
database
and the last product doesn't have image
at all
okay perfect now it's time to implement
outputting image
right here okay so let's go to the
index.php scroll down and right here we
need to output that
image okay so it's very easy now we have
to create
image tag with the source and right here
we have to output product
image okay just like this save
and refresh and here we see that huge
image which we should not see of course
that huge so i'm going to open up css
actually i'm going to give also
that image class
image tag some class okay
so let's give it a class of
like the thumb thumb image okay
so let's go to the up css and
give it a width of 50 pixel
okay save it and refresh
and probably we need to clear cache and
refresh like that
right click empty cache and hard reload
and here we see that
product images okay for this one this is
broken because
it just has a folder it doesn't have an
actual image
okay so now it's time to implement
delete and then update okay but first
let's do delete because it's easier and
we can clean up some products okay
so how to do that let's go to the
index.php
and whenever we click that delete button
it should redirect
us to the delete.php so i'm going to
change this into
an anchor link inside href
i'm going gonna provide delete dot php
and i'm gonna pass the id of the product
which i want to delete okay and i'm
gonna pass this as a qr string
okay id corresponds
to product
id okay now if i refresh and
click the delete i see in the url delete
php id
equals 13. if i click this on another
product i see
id equals 11. so we have to create
that delete php so let's go to the
product script
right click and let's just create
delete php and we have to get that id
from the get
super global get select the product and
delete or just don't select immediately
delete
okay so let's take out the id
so id equals from super global git
let's just take id okay
but here's one important thing also
which to which needs to be considered
okay the id might not be given okay so
we might access these we have
possibility for that
we might access this without the qr
string
in this case we have an error undefined
index id so what we need to do right
here
if that get id exists then take that id
otherwise take now okay and we need to
check
if id does not exist
if not id then redirect user
to the index.php okay location
index.php and that's it we can put exit
right here as well
okay refresh and we are redirected to
linuxphp
which is good okay now we can actually
implement and
delete that product based on the id
but i'm going to show you one thing
which is also good
to consider okay so because when we
click that button
it makes changing the database it
actually deletes a record
in the database it's better to do this
using method post
okay how to do that so in the index.php
i'm gonna revert this back into button
okay and i'm gonna put this button
inside
form okay and inside that form i'm gonna
create
also one input which will be input type
hidden
which will have name of id and the value
of the product id okay
so and that pattern basically
does not need href anymore
and its type should be note button but
submit
okay so whenever i click that button it
should
submit that form with method
of post and it should submit that
on delete php and it will send that
id as a post value okay so now if i
create that delete php and take that
id from post instead of get
and just dump this id right here
we will see that id okay so refresh so
by the way these buttons are
now not next to each other but they are
stacked
so this is because the form is a block
level element so we have to specify
right here that its display is
inline block and that's it so we will
see them
next to each other so i click the delete
and i see that id
taken from the post and and i don't see
that id also in the url okay
now we need to connect to the database
and delete that
product okay so i'm going to copy
the connection string okay again i'm
highlighting that
we are doing this not in an optimal way
we are just
focused on to achieve our purpose as
as quickly as possible just i'm trying
to teach you as much as i can
okay and then we're to change this and
make this
improved version and we're going to
learn also some new techniques
so in the delete php i'm going to paste
this
and we have to actually make
uh delete we we have to actually create
prepared statement
down below okay if id exists okay in
this case
we have to run prepare
that should be delete from
products where id equals column id
okay we have to save that statement
oops statement
and we have to bind bind value
okay so this is the column id so we have
to bind
column id corresponds to id and we have
to run execute on that
if it's we if it is not able to update
that to delete that product
it will throw an exception however if it
didn't throw an exception
it successfully deleted and we're going
to redirect user
to the index php
save it go to the product
index page and i'm going to hit the
delete button right here
and you see that the product is deleted
okay so let's just
delete unnecessary ones cool
we can also check the database that
we don't have that much recourse
here we have we have only six records
now
okay so we successfully implemented
delete now it's time
to implement update okay so let's go to
the index php and i'm going to change
this into
anchor link i'm going to add right there
update dot php question mark id
equals to the product id
okay we are not going to use form and
button
just like we did for the delete because
that just opens the form that does not
run the actual update
okay so it should be anchor link with
update
we pass the id we don't need that button
okay and that's it so we don't have of
course that update
php so if i just click the edit it will
show this not found
so let's go ahead and create that
update.php and we need to
copy and paste couple of logics right
here okay
so we have to actually render the same
form we are rendering in the create php
right
so but if if it is an update we have to
also display the user
uh not the user sorry but the image okay
of the product
so let's copy and paste this on
update and let's make a couple of
adjustments first of all
right here at the top we get the id
okay and if we didn't get the id we need
to redirect
user to the index.php so i'm going to
copy the following logic
and paste right here
and i'm going to take out now this from
get
not from post okay and if we didn't
provide id
it will redirect to the to the index.php
now we have to select the product based
on that id
okay so we create statement equals
pdo prepare
select everything from
products where id
equals column id okay
on statement we bind value
this is going to be the id id right here
and then i'm going to call execute
and then i'm going to call fetch
and not fetch all just fetch and specify
pdo fetch associative area
and that's going to be the product i
want okay
and i'm going to dump this product right
now
and exit don't continue execution
refresh and here we see that product we
would like to update
so if i provide another id right here
but let's just pick up the
existing id like the first one for
example
okay that's going to be iphone 11 we
have
second id that's going to be galaxy s20
and so on
now we have to populate form with the
values
and we should also display the actual
image
okay so we need to do that let's go to
the update php
and scroll down so the following code is
executed when the method is post
so it's not going to be executed when we
open that form
so let's just collapse this for now we
have that random string function so
let's just leave this as it is
scroll down and right here we have the
errors
and probably inside the form right here
let's just display the image
okay so we do the following if
the product selected product has image
there
let's just display it okay and
if and right here i'm gonna display
an image with the product
image okay excellent
let's have a look so how this works
so this product doesn't have image let's
go actually
back so i'm going to create a big link
button from the update php
so right here not actually let's
do a path so let's make a paragraph
inside the paragraph i'm going to make
an anchor link with href
to index.php
go back to products
okay let's see that should be
probably btn btn
btn secondary
refresh and here we have it okay let's
click the edit on
on the product which has image so here i
click edit
and i see that huge image so i'm going
to add a class on that image as well
right here let's give it a class of
update image i'm not going to give it a
thumb image because it will be very
small
so let's make it update image let's go
to the up css
and paste update image right here
and let's give it a width of 120 pixels
okay
refresh and this is our product image
okay if i want to change that product
image
i have to choose another one okay but
the actual product title product
description and product price
is not populated okay let's scroll
up inside that update php and we have
that product title
price and description and what we can do
is that just
select take the title price and
description
from that product because it is an
associative area okay
so product price and
product description okay
save and refresh and here we see so it
is there
uh probably the description is not
provided for that special product
that should not be called by the way
create new product that should be called
update product in the product title
update product and let's just
make it a
product title
so this is good
and okay now let's implement the actual
updating of the product okay
so almost all validations what we have
implemented for
create will be the same so we did we
take the
uh the title description price
so we we don't need the date by the way
so we we should remove this and if the
title and the price is not provided we
run the um the add the errors
and then this can be there so on the
product
the creating that doesn't hurt anybody
so if we can leave it
and if the errors is empty then we take
the image but what we need to do here is
that
we need to first delete the old image
so that specific product might already
have some image okay
so we need to delete that and i'm going
to write an if statement here
if the product we selected at the top
has some image let's go ahead and
delete that image okay product
image unlink basically removes that
image okay and we can even remove the
whole directory okay but i'm going to
leave this for you
as it is now okay the rest of the code
is the same
so we just uh if the image is uploaded
then we just uh make the saving that in
the database
but instead of inserting here we need to
run
update okay so let's just run update
products and we're gonna set
title to equal to bind parameter title
okay image equals to bind parameter
image
and let's move this on the next line
okay the description equals to
description price
equals to buying parameter price and we
don't do anything with date because
it is already inserted there so the date
is inserted basically when we
create record not we update okay
so update product set title image
description price and then we provide
these values
like the title image description
uh price and we don't need date
and we also need to pay attention to the
image path
okay so that actually should be if we
don't upload the image
that image path should not be an empty
string but it should be
actual product image
okay that should be the image path
now let's see how this actually works so
refresh this and maybe provide some
description
description for note 20 and hit the
submit button
and something bad just happened
okay i see what happened that's the
biggest mistake
so right here we run update without wear
so which basically means that we update
all updated
all the products with the same title
image description and price so we have
to specify right here where
id equals to the column id
and that id should be bound right
here okay id is the id
okay so here is our mistake so let's now
refresh
and edit and let's choose a different
image and it should be galaxy
s20 okay let's remove this
we can leave the price so and it was
actually updated
let's change the other ones into
iphone for example iphone 11
hit submit and it was actually
updated we can put something in the
description description for
iphone 11 and everything basically works
smoothly but right here it didn't work
so when we update the description
but don't do anything with the image it
actually did not work and let's see why
so if i just inspect that
and right here we have this tk6
so there should be an image inside the
tk6
tk6 no we don't have image right there
okay so let's see what happens
aha so here is the thing so we delete
the product
image if there is that image we
basically don't check
that the image product should only be
deleted when
the new image is uploaded okay so that
should be written
inside that if statement so if
the new image is uploaded in this case
we should delete the old one
and update the new one okay so save
and edit that iphone
hit the submit okay and the others
were broken
and that why did that happen so
let's just have a look so
it should be which one is this let's
note 20 so let's update the node 20
hit the submit and it is there and for
that others there is no image
so that is actually good so we can
delete that others
okay so this looks good so we have
successfully
implemented creating updating
and deleting of products with the
easiest possible way we could
okay so now let's do a quick search
so how to do it inside index.php i'm
going to put right here
above the table form group so let's go
to the bootstrap documentation and i'm
going to search for
input right here and i actually want
input group so down below
i should see that input group example
right here so this one recipient's
username
so i'm going to copy this and paste
right here
and inside the placeholder i'm going to
write
search for products
okay this search basically needs
name as well let's remove this area
so it needs
name to be search
and it also should have button which
will be
search okay and we can put this
inside form as well which has
type of submit okay
and we can put this inside the form
which will submit on the current file
index.php with the method get
so i'm going to leave that attributes
action and method empty
paste this right here and
let's actually see so right here refresh
here we have that search for products
i'm going to write something right here
galaxy
hit the enter in the url we see search
equals
galaxy we can take that using get
right here okay so search
keywords search for example equals to
from the getsuperglobal
i want to take out the search okay
if search is not presented there let's
take out an empty string
and i'm going to write an if so if
search exists
then we make we need to make slightly
different select
okay if search is not there then the
select remains the same
so select everything from products if
search is there
i'm gonna add right here where
title like the
bind parameter title okay and
if we pass right here bind parameter we
need to bind the value as well
statement bind value for
title it should be
the search text okay but i'm going to
put
person symbol in front of and the after
the search
that is necessary for mysql like to
search in the middle of the title
so i save that and refresh and you see
that it filters
only that galaxy okay so if i
provide right here iphone it searches
that iphone only
but we need to put that search keyword
back inside the input
so how to do that we have that search
right here
and we can scroll down and assign a
value to that
input so right here
i'm going to write value php echo
search so whenever we open that we have
iphone right here
if i just remove that qr string and hit
the enter that search will be an empty
string
and it shows every product okay so let's
add
one more product iphone iphone
se for example some cool
description in the price we provide
something
in the images we provide that
se image hit the submit
and right here we see that at the very
top so if i
update that i can change this
image submit and here we see
okay so everything basically works fine
however we should mention that we did
not write very optimal code
so i'm not proud what what we did so we
achieved our result
so but we should always think
how to write reusable code how to
achieve our goals in the best possible
way
so as i mentioned very often beginners
choose the following way
and i just followed that path so created
four different files
for index update delete and create we
have
the connection to the database in all
these files
uh okay and we have some similar logic
in these files and we also have the
layout that talk type
doctype.html and header everything
basically
in these three files index update and
create the delete basically does not
need
that layout because it is redirected
back to the index.php
okay now it's time we have to modify
our uh our code so that we can make it
better
so this is working but this is a bad
version of that crot
so now we can make it better and learn
let's
learn uh how to auto load files
learn how to work with composer and then
we can rewrite this in the best
possible way okay so let's refactor
release
so let's start with the partials okay
scroll down
in the update or index.php and we're
gonna move this
into a separate file okay so i'm gonna
create on the left side
so actually i'm gonna move everything
this okay
in a folder called
uh zero one uh underscore
page so this is the base version and but
i'm gonna provide this
on on github so you can see the what's
the page version okay
so let's move every file inside that bit
and let's create now a second folder
which will be better and then we're
gonna have good version
okay second folder and that's going to
be better
and then we're going to have good
version as i mentioned but even that
good version won't be the best version
so i will call the best version the
version
which includes all the modern and tested
tools
like if you want to create a real
application which includes even the
crowds application
uh you should think more about like the
pagination
and couple of other things like the
grouping items and so on and the best
version from my point of view
will be a version which will be based on
some modern popular framework like
laravel or e2 framework okay
so let's actually refactor this in a
like the best possible way so how to do
that
so first of all we need to create a
one folder for uh views
let's do that views okay
inside that views we're going to create
also
one folder for partials
okay and inside the partials i'm going
to put the header
in the footer okay so let's take that
and make it as a header so
inside the partials let's create a file
header php and i'm going to paste this
right here
okay and let's just include that
include include ones
that views so this is the update
okay so this is a this is a different
file so let's actually copy and paste
this
code
so let's let's return this back so this
is the um
this is the paid version so i'm going to
close all the files right now
and move them one by one into my
better folder okay so let's move this
update
into better folder okay so right here
so and inside the updates we need to
change
that header
php include
include once it should be include ones
views partials header
and let's do the same thing for index
and create so i'm going to copy and
paste this index and create right here
and let's copy this header inclusion
and go to the index.php
and paste right here into update php we
already have into create php
and paste right
here okay and we can do the same thing
for footer but it's much much smaller
code it's just body and html
so you get the idea so i'm going to
leave this as it is
let's more focus on the code reusability
for example connecting to the database
okay so these two lines are repeated in
these three files
and two lines might not be very big
problem to repeat but the
more bigger problem is that
we actually have that connecting
credentials in three different places so
if i decide to change my database
from db name from product scroll to just
products
i have to update this in three different
places okay
which is not very good so in the best
case i should have this in a single
place
so i'm going to create uh inside that
better folder
i'm going to create database php
okay and i'm going to move this code
into the database php right here
okay and i'm going to use the database
php
right here but i'm not going to write
include i'm going to write require once
okay and we need that database php and
i'm going to repeat that
for create and for update
but look at this phpstorm
cannot see that pdo variable
so it doesn't understand that the
database creates pdo variable okay
so that's actually fine it will work and
we can have a look in the browser as
well
so let's open that better version and
right here we see
of course images are broken and we're
going to fix this step by step
but the connecting to the database
actually works
okay and the keywords are successfully
made so if you want that to see
if you are using phpstorm and you want
that to be seen by php store
we can do like this from the database
php we can return that pdo
okay and right here we can
assign that pdo variable okay in this
case
phpstorm can understand that here's a
variable of pdo
however it cannot understand what is the
type of that pdo
okay so we can do in a different way
and we can revert this back from here as
well
oops not this one and we can declare
right here
a doc block okay so right here i write
a variable of
pdo is an instance of pdo class
okay and in this case phpstorm can
understand
that the variable exists but it can also
understand that
the variable is an instance of the pdo
so if i just
start typing some methods like the
prepare it autocompletes that for me
so if i just remove this it doesn't see
it doesn't autocomplete
also okay i'm going to copy and paste
these
into the
all three files okay and
that's actually good and let's now
work more and about like the combining
create and update um
forms into single one because we have
that forms
in a separate files and if i decide that
i want to
add one additional input field right
here for example the product location
okay i have to do this in the update php
and
in the create php as well okay i want
this to be
in a separate place in a separate area
which can be reusable okay so inside
that views
i'm gonna create a
folder for products so if we think about
that
we're gonna probably if we think that
this project might get large
and we might have other crowds right
here
we need to put this in a separate folder
okay again
i really encourage you that if you are
doing big project
and if your project gets larger i really
encourage you to use
the modern frameworks like laravel or
codigniter or e2 or symfony okay and
there are others as well
and don't start implementing uh your
things
so implementing your own framework or
like the
cms is good for learning purposes
okay and for some side projects not for
projects which needs to be random
production
okay and right here i'm going to create
a form
okay let's call it underscore form or
just form
okay and inside that form i'm going to
move the actual form
and probably that includes that errors
as well
okay so let's take out the following
code and move it inside that form okay
but we need couple of variables right
here
we need product variable we need errors
variable
okay and the form should be used in
update php
and in create as well okay php
include that views
products form php
and let's move copy and paste these into
create as well
so let's just remove all this form and
errors and paste this right here okay
however our form has a product variable
right here
and checks if that product variable
exists
it takes that image from the product
variable and renders that image okay if
the image exists on the product
so let's see how this everything works
so if i just
click that create product so i see the
following error
undefined variable product okay
so this happens because inside createp
inside create.php we don't actually have
that product variable
so what i'm going to do is that create
okay inside create php to have
title as an empty string
in this case we only need image so we
can just do it with the image okay so
let's let's do first with the image
refresh this
and the error basically disappears okay
so let's have a look in the console
because
i think up css is not included and here
we have it
so up css is not included let's move
copy
up css from bed into better version
and here we have refresh and that looks
good
okay what else do we need to do inside
create
create php we have that function random
string
and we have the same function in the
update.php
we should not have like the repeated
code
so right now i'm going to create a
file which is called functions.php
and i'm going to move that
the following function there inside that
functions
uh right here and i'm going to include
that functions php
inside update and create as well so
i'm going to remove that function from
update
and at the very top i'm going to include
require once that functions php
and do the same thing inside create
okay require ones
functions php save and refresh
so let's now see how this actually works
by the way we need to add right here
also go back to products
so let me copy the following pattern
so go back to products and put it in the
create as well right
here refresh go back to products this
works fine
by the way images are not also displayed
so
let's copy these images right here
okay we have a lot of empty folders
that's probably we don't delete the
folder when we just delete the image
so let's just refresh and here we have
all these things
and let's see update so this is the
update which works fine
so let's just add update it hit the
enter
and it works fine let's just create new
product
new test product with some price hit the
enter
and the new test product is also there
however we still have
code duplication and that is inside that
create
php and update php okay
so most of the logic of validation right
here
or uploading an image is the same okay
so we are taking just the if the request
is
uh method is the post we just take the
title description price we run some
validations
if the directory doesn't exist we create
the directory
and then we upload the image okay so
it will be good if we somehow be able to
combine them
into single logic
okay so i'm going to create
a file and i'm going to call that file
validate product okay
and i'm gonna move most of the logic
from
update and create into that validate
product
that's gonna be take the title making
the validations
saving that image okay everything
this except actually making some
changes in the database so let me copy
this
uh paste right here and remove that
making changes in the database okay also
redirect
so let's format the code and right here
we have the title
description price we run the validation
and we need a product right here
which will be passed from the update
okay and from the create so if i just
remove
now the following logic okay
so this is by the way updating an image
okay so just remove this thing from here
okay remove that validations and
title as well and i'm to include
or require ones that validate
product okay so we have that validate
product right here
and that validate product basically
creates a couple of variables like title
description and price but we need also
image path
so that image path should be also
created inside the
validate product okay and then
that image path should be used down
below
right here as well and
now if we have a look at this so we
don't have that much
information right here okay so
uh let's observe the code okay so if the
method is not post if it is a get
so we get the title price and
description from the selected product
from the database
and we display this inside that form
okay
we pass that title price and description
but we also pass
product which is necessary for rendering
an image right here
okay so if the method is post we get
that validate product that validate
product takes the information from the
post
creates variables there runs some
validations
and if there is no error basically about
that validation
it also makes an uploading saving of a
file
so right here we see that the if the
errors is
empty and if there are no errors
basically from that validate product
file
we run the update okay that should
actually work
so let's just save this and go to the
website and edit that and add an image
for example okay
new test product upload an image and we
see that right here
so let's give it also some description
hit the submit button then edit and we
see the description is populated right
there
so the update script works perfectly
let's now see how the create script
works so
click that button and
inside create basically we didn't move
any logic right so we just need to
remove these things and we also need the
date
inside the create so what we can do that
is that pass that date down below
immediately okay right here instead of
having a variable
okay so let's just remove the title
description price the validation
creating directory also remove that
uploading a file because that is all
done in that
validate product and let's just write
require once validate product
okay and if the errors are empty then we
make an insert in the database
okay so let's see how this works now so
go to the
products page and choose a file
test product 2.
i'm going to leave the description empty
price one two three four
hit the submit and we see right here
that the product is actually added okay
so
if we go inside the edit the description
is not there
so just add test so everything basically
looks good
okay so and if we just analyze the files
we have reduced the code written
a lot okay so let's have a look in the
update so what we have written here is
that
we include the database connection and
some functions and we just do the
validations that that
if the id is not passed we redirect user
to the index.php
then we select that product
specific product from the database then
we check some validations which is um
inside the validate product and we just
directly make an
update in the products and down below we
also have much smaller code we don't
have
everything so there are only 54 lines
okay in the create php we have something
similar
okay we don't have that much code
repetition in the
functions php we have moved that random
string
and in the where is the delete php
okay we don't have the delete let's move
that delete php which i think doesn't
need
anything to be changed so yeah we need
to
put right here i require ones of the
database
so i'm going to copy these
two lines and paste right here and that
is delete php
let's have a look if the delete works so
i'm gonna delete
that product and here it is so it also
works fine
however this is not perfect version
okay so we have to make a couple of
changes right here also
so first of all if we just
have a look right here inside the
index.php we can actually access
database.php okay
we can also access functions.php
invalidate product.php okay
and the database php basically doesn't
do anything wrong
but it's a very bad practice to access
the files from the browser which
are not necessary and which should not
be accessible from the browser
okay and we should move
only in a specific folder only the files
which should be web accessible
so very often there exists in a modern
frameworks there exists a public folder
and that public folder is only web
accessible folder
public or it might be called also web
and in this case we're gonna move
the create index update and delete as
only web accessible php files inside
that public folder
okay i'm gonna cut them and also inside
public
i'm going to create a folder for
products
because in the real applications there
might be some
other crud like not only for products
but it might be for orders
okay so right here we're gonna paste
this
and they are moved inside that public
products
okay however we need to adjust how we
are requiring okay
we need to go one directory back no two
directory back
and fix that require once
in all these files
okay let's open index.php as well
and in update as well okay
and we have to also adjust the views
okay if we scroll down right here we
first of all we need to adjust that
validate product
and if we scroll down right here we need
to adjust
views as well okay
let's do the same thing in create
right here as well so let's save this
and have a look right now
so we open that better and we need to go
to the public
and products okay so we have a problem
in the index.php
the partials included basically right
here
needs to be fixed refresh
okay and the up css there's a problem
about
up css okay so when we develop a real
application
it is very often and it should it's a
good practice also
to be started on a virtual host
okay so we create a virtual host and we
run
application on that virtual host so the
virtual host might be called for example
products.test okay and whenever we open
that
url it will basically display the same
application what we see right here right
now
so a simulation of virtual host will be
php's built-in
server okay so i'm going to open
terminal right now
go to that folder 14
in a better and in a public and that
public is the only web accessible folder
as i mentioned
and we're going to start a php's
built-in server using php
minus s localhost
localhost port 8080
okay i'm going to hit the enter and that
starts that php development server
and let's open port 8018 and we don't
actually see anything because it
searches for index.php
okay so let's open index dot php
but there is no index.php in that public
right
index.php is inside that products so
let's just open
products slash index.php
i'm going to hit the enter and right
here we see all the products
and basically it will work in the same
way as it was working before
however we need to fix the css and
images problem okay
refresh this and we see how the css is
included
so it is included from the product slash
up css
we need to change that and we need to
include that
using uh slash as an absolute path
so let me show this to you
okay so right here if we just put slash
the css basically will start working but
we need to move that css into public
folder as well
okay save it refresh that and the css
actually started working so we see
padding
around that content okay so if we just
don't create a virtual host or don't
start that
php's built-in server we have to
struggle a lot to detect what should be
the current path for the css
okay so right now if we just have a look
that up css is included from
uh slash localhost so because we put
right here slash
that's is taking from the domain okay
domain slash
whatever is the domain slash app.css
if we just don't have these in this case
the css is included from that public
product
sub css okay so in this case we have to
go one directory back and do something
like this okay
which is not safe okay not very good
solution
so here is the problems that beginners
come across when developing on php
okay so no our bed version
neither better version is good enough
to actually um like the be proud of what
we've done
okay so we need to
like have an absolutely different
approach okay
and this approach even is not perfect
it's not
not even close to perfect because if we
have
another crowd applications like the
orders and the
um like the invoices and so on and so
forth
so we have to create each file for each
operation like the create update delete
and
finally we may come up to hundreds of
files
uh just for that no like the
functionalities okay
and it will be very hard to maintain and
it's not also like the good practice
so even though we made this better and
we have that web accessible folder
and we have that views and separate
files and so on
it is not like the best approach okay
i'm going to show you a couple of things
right here when like they finalize that
the better version
and then we're gonna move uh the next
topic
okay so let's see so we we cannot
continue working on this
url anymore we should should switch to
that
okay that is more safe and more correct
okay and later we can also create
virtual host out of
that so now we're gonna put uh right
here slash
up css that is from which we need to
actually include
refresh and we see that and we need to
adjust
also images okay so whenever we include
images
we need to put slash in front of that
first of all let's move all the images
inside the public folder
okay that's that's good
okay why are they opened i don't know
refresh we don't see that images and
let's go to the index.php
inside the products index.php
and right here we need to when we
display the image we need to put
slash in front of the source okay we put
slash we refresh
and we see all the images okay if we go
inside
update we need to put slash right here
as well
so let's go to the form php because we
have the
update right here and we put slash right
here okay
save and refresh and this image is also
displayed however now
if we upload an image it will be
uploaded in a different folder
and let's observe this i'm going to
close this pad
and let's actually delete all the empty
folders
okay and now let's upload an image
so let's create actually new product
okay
test three i'm going to upload
the image give it a price hit the submit
and here we have that problem validate
products that's another problem by the
way
let's go to the create php and
right here we should adjust that
inclusion
so refresh that and the product is
created however the image is not
displayed
okay why does this happen so let's
observe
actually so
right here look at this so the image was
actually uploaded in the images folder
of that products so we didn't have that
images folder
like before here but it appeared okay
so why does this happen okay
so if i just delete this i'm going to
show you this once again so if i just
delete this
and create one more product
with some test and some values hit the
submit
right here it creates that images folder
okay
so this happens from the validate
product
okay so the image is uploaded from here
and
look at this what now happens so right
here when we actually move
uploaded file okay or just make
directory or
basically when we do some operations
with the file system
and we just specify a relative path
in this case image path is relative it
doesn't start with slash
so this means it is a relative path so
that relative path is taken from
relatively from the file which is
executed right now and
when we create a product create
php is the file which is executed
okay so right here and the create php
includes that validate product so any
path basically which is
right here given to a function which
works with the file system
any path basically is relative to the
current
file which is executed okay and the
current file which is executed
is the create php in the product
in the public products folder okay and
that's why
because every path is relative to that
create php it creates
images folder next to the that create
php
and it also will delete that image okay
however we don't want it to be like this
we want that to be saved inside the
images
so that's also a good thing to learn
something new
okay so now let's actually use a magic
constant tier so that magic constant
deer
refers to the current directory where
that file is located and that file which
is called validate product
is located in the better folder
okay so what we need to do is that
no matter if we are creating an images
directory right here
or doing something else regarding file
system we have
to prefix from the current directory
okay from the current directory let's go
to public and images so if
the directory inside public images
doesn't exist
let's go ahead and create that public
images directory
okay down below when we need to delete
the product image from the current
directory
we go to public folder
and inside the public folder we delete
that product
image okay right here when we actually
need
to like the create directory i'm going
to prefix
the public folder
and then the image path okay and right
here also when we need to
save in the database i'm going to prefix
not in the database but on the file
system
i'm going to prefix public
and then the image path okay so this is
how we need to do
and now if i just remove that
products images which should not be
there and if i
create new product test 4
choose an image hit the submit
we see the image right here and that
image is uploaded
in this folder okay so that we see image
right here proves that information
okay so as for the searching i think
search works uh as it was working before
like it searches all all the test
products
or iphone or anything what we want okay
again i want to like highlight that this
is not
a good version it's better definitely
than the previous one
but it's not going good enough version
like to be proud of what we've done okay
so we need a different approach we need
a different mechanism
just i wanted to build that big and
better version so that we know how to
like refactor our code how to like split
into different files
and how to work with problems which
generally come across
and because this is the crash course
this is for absolute beginners
we need that knowledge so we need to
write bit code
to learn how to improve that code and
how to
like the meta make our code better and
we need to also
see what's the difference between the
bet code and the good code
okay so we need to know that this code
is not good it is
actually paid code and probably these
such kind of codes are the reason why
many people actually
don't like php okay because
such kind of codes are very often
written for production websites
especially in an old time okay so now
let's move on about
autoloading and see how we can use
composer for autoloading classes
and then we're going to rewrite our
products crowd application
using custom routing we're going to come
up to
custom mvc routing and mini mvc
framework
and build the product scrolled on top of
that and we will see a huge
huge difference between that product
scroll what we have right here
uh better or paid and those
that one we're going to build after the
we learn the autoloading okay
so let's do this let's first
talk about namespaces what are
namespaces
and why are they necessary so let's
imagine that we're building an
e-commerce application and we need the
following classes in our project we need
class email
class person and class order okay
and we decided to implement the email
sending
and for this we need to install third
party package
in our application and that third party
package
also has class email in its source code
so we have a name collision between our
email class
and the email class that third party
package provides
so what is the solution basically using
this approach
there is no solution until we rename
our email class to something else but
namespaces
is the perfect solution for that so in
general it's good practice to put
all our source code in a namespace
called up or whatever namespace you
prefer
so in our case if we put all our classes
in namespace up the identifier of the
class is not just
email person and order but it is up
backslash email up backslash person
and up backslash order and if we just
try to install the third party package
in our application which has class email
it won't conflict our email class
because
our email class is in different name
space
and it is it's a full identifier is
up backslash email it is much like
a files and folder so namespace can be a
folder
and class name can be a file you cannot
simply have
two files with the same name in a single
folder
right okay now let's install composer
and
enable autoloading and in general see
what is autoloading and what advantages
it has in order to make autoloading
working
we need to have composer installed okay
let's type composer in google and the
very first link
will be what we are looking for we're
going to hit
download and we just need to download
for
our operating system for windows we're
going to click the
composer setup xa for other operating
systems
and for command line instructions we
just need to copy and paste the
following
in our terminal so i'm going to click
composer setup for windows
and it's going to start download and
download it for
in couple of seconds right here we have
it
i'm gonna click on composer setup and
let's just
install this i'm gonna install for all
users
yes next
we're gonna leave this default next
next and install okay
so installation is basically done and
now
we are we are able to use the composer
command
from command line okay so let's just
open command prompt
and we're going to type composer and
this is the outputs the composer gives
us
and we have a lot of sub commands which
we can use
now let's see namespaces and autoloading
in action okay on the right side i'm
going to open autoloading folder it's
index.php
and right here in this folder i'm going
to create two classes
so one will be email class
and second is going to be person class
okay so i'm gonna
require both of them in this index.php
okay require once email
and person okay
in email.php i'm going to let me remove
this
i'm going to just create constructor
which simply prints email
class nothing else
and i'm going to do the same thing in
person constructor okay
so echo
person class br
let's just save this and now on the
right side actually we're going to
create
instances of this so email is new
email and person
equals new person
so save and refresh and we see email
class and person class
now let's enable autoloading okay
so how we can do that and also at the
same time create
namespace okay so i'm gonna
generate composer json in that folder
auto loading folder
so for this i'm gonna create terminal
and go to that folder and run
composer init this will
ask me couple of questions like what
should be the package name
and that should be vendor name slash the
actual package name
i'm going to leave this empty the
description of the package i'm going to
leave this empty
the author i'm going to leave everything
default
hit enter a couple of times and then the
file is
generated now right here we can see that
composer json which contains
let's collapse the left side
i did something wrong okay
and right here we see that let's zoom in
we see that the name of the package is
this
authors are this and this is the require
inside require we write down
all the dependencies the current package
has
okay now we are going to enable
autoloading
and we're gonna do in the following way
we have to specify
auto load right here auto
load then we're gonna specify the
standard
using which we need that autoload and
i'm going to specify
psr dash 4
okay that is the standard and then we
have to specify right here
the namespace and i'm going to set it to
up backslash
that's going to be the namespace and the
directory
which corresponds to the namespace okay
i'm going to set this to
up directory okay now
we have to create right here
directory app
and i'm going to move email and person
both
inside the directory and
also open each of them and specify the
namespace
so right here we write namespace
up and inside the email the same thing
namespace up now the email in person
does not exist
without the namespace so inside
index.php
we're gonna have an error right here
even if we fix that
require once right here and right here
we're gonna have an error because we are
using email in person
without the namespace and it doesn't
exist we can see this
immediately in the browser class email
not found
however if we just try to write here up
backslash email and refresh we see that
email class is found but the class
person not found
and if we do the same thing for person
we will see
both of them okay now let's do this
autoloading and what is actually the
autoloading and what advantages
it has imagine that our application gets
larger and we have hundreds of classes
and the classes are just depended on
each other
we have to write this require once
whenever we need that class
right so auto loading gives us
possibility to avoid
writing these required ones for classes
namespaces excuse me classes interfaces
and traits i haven't actually explained
what is interface what is trade
that's i think an advanced part of
object oriented programming
and i really encourage you to check out
more about this you will find a lot of
tutorials and
written articles about that but now
let's enable autoloading so right here
we specified auto load
and we need to run composer update now
so when we do this composer will create
a vendor directory actually
we just need to go to that folder 15
autoloading and run composer
update let's wait couple of seconds
it started reading that composer json
and
will create a vendor folder inside that
15 autoloading and inside the vendor
folder
it will create autoload php which will
be
the key file and responsible for
autoloading all our classes and we won't
need to write
require once for any other classes
and we will just include that autoload
php
which will be inside the vendor let's
wait a couple of seconds until the
composer update does this
and then we're going to update our code
and see it working
so here is the composer update finished
the work and right here we see that
vendor and
inside the vendor we see that
autoload.php
now i'm going to change that require
once into
just requiring vendor
auto autoload php okay
and that's basically it so if i just
open
in the browser and refresh we see the
same output
because all our classes email in person
is automatically loaded by that auto
loader
the autoloader has a couple of other
advantages in the composer general
so the composer is a php dependency
management tool
and it gives us possibility to find some
packages and
install using composer so let's go to
packages.org which is the main
repository
composer repository okay and i'm going
to write here
guzzle okay which is very popular
package
which gives us possibility to interact
with remote resources that's basically
an http client
so i'm gonna install this using composer
composer require
causal http slash causal where guzzle
http is the vendor name
and guzzle is the package name so i'm
going to copy this
go to our project and right here
run composer require castle http causal
that will take a couple of seconds until
it gets that package and grabs
but it will also install other packages
which are dependents of that casual http
causal package
okay so let's have a look in the
documentation right here if we scroll
down below
we see how we need to use that so we
just create a client
with guzzle http namespace and then we
make a request on the following url we
make get request
and then we can get the status code from
the response we can get the headers
and we can get the response body so i'm
going to copy the following lines
and go in the index.php
okay i'm going to actually comment this
code
and paste down below the code copied
from the packages
but first let's have a look what the
composer did
so it started it actually installed six
packages
look at this and the last one is what we
requested
so first it analyze the dependency tree
and install the other packages which
are the like the required packages for
the gazelle http cousin
and finally that was installed so
basically we don't care how many
packages will be installed behind
the main thing is that this package is
installed and we can use that
now we just paste the following code
from packages
save that and let's have a look in the
browser refresh this
and here we see so we see the status
code we see the header
and we see the whole response grabbed
from that url and it is that easy to
install
other third-party packages and use them
and that clients
might be using many other classes if we
scroll at the very top we see
how many uh classes are included right
here
okay that use basically indicates
that i want to use the following class
in the current file that causal http is
the namespace
the cookie is the sub namespace and that
is the
actual class so we can follow using
phpstorm control and mouse
and we can see that is the class inside
that namespace
causal http causal cookie and
it also requires many other classes from
that name space sub name space and so on
and all these things is managed composer
and all the classes
are included by composer so we can even
change our email and person code
and instead of having right here up
emailing a person
we can just write here use up backslash
email and use up backslash person
and we just use email in person just
like this
so basically using that use i'm telling
the current file
that i'm using up email and in the
current file you should refer it as an
email
i can also specify an alias right here
as for example just e and now i can use
that class as an e
class right here okay so this is how
the autoloading and namespaces work
now let's rewrite our crud application
products crowd application
using custom routing and we're going to
implement a mini
mini mvc framework as well so let's go
to that
folder of product squad and i'm going to
create
right here 0 3
underscore code so that's going to be
the good version
but again i want to highlight that if
you want to implement the very best
version of that product squad
application probably
you should think about using a popular
framework
like laravel or symphony or e2
or any others okay let's start with the
entry script so basically we're gonna
have
one file which will handle the request
and return the response and that's going
to be
the only file always so we're going to
create right here index.php
okay and that's going to be the entry
script let's open now terminal
and go to that folder
and i'm going to actually put this
index.php inside the public folder okay
so we're going to have
a web accessible folder and known web
accessible files and folders
in the index.php because it is an entry
script it should be executed in the
browser
that should be inside the public folder
so right now let's go to the public
folder and i'm going to start php's
built-in server
php dash s
local host and port 8080 i'm going to
start it on port 8080
so the development server is started and
now i can
open the browser and right here type
localhost port 8018 and we don't see
anything
right here because we don't print simply
anything but let's just print right here
hello world and refresh and we see hello
world
and no matter what i provide what path i
provide
like create for example or even
create dot php
uh in this case it actually searches for
that file and it's
if it doesn't find that file and that's
why it returns that not found
but if i just provide create or update
so it simply prints the hello world
because that index.php is the file
which basically is always
responsible for getting the request and
returning the response
okay now what i need to do here is that
create a custom
rotor and the configure that router
for a couple of roads so what i want
is that create router in the following
way
router is new router and i'm going to
configure the router for example
when a get request is made on slash
let's use a specific class
specific function okay so we're going to
come up with an
mvc structure which means that we need
models
views and controllers so i'm going to
create
right here controllers folder
and inside that controllers folder i'm
going to create
a main controller and i'm going to also
specify
namespace right here that's going to be
up
controllers and we have to also create
composer json
and enable autoloading so let's open
terminal let's open second terminal
go to the folder that's going to be
good and yeah right here in this
good folder we're going to create
composer json
so composer init
it will ask us couple of questions i'm
going to hit enter on all of them
and here we have that composer json
now i'm going to open that composer json
and configure
auto load the autoload is an object
with psr for standard we're gonna
do the following for namespace up
which corresponds to the current folder
so any class basically which will be
inside that
good folder will have a namespace of
up so let's save this and run
composer update which will need couple
of seconds
but we can already create a rotor class
right here
so i'm going to create rotor
with namespace up in that good folder
so right here we have that namespace i'm
going to collapse that
and because we are using a get method on
that router
i'm going to create get method right
here as well
and in the main controller i'm going to
create a
main method which will be used
right here in this index.php
so we are actually doing products crowd
application
right so maybe let's just rename that
main controller and call it a
product controller okay so
right here we will have product product
controller as well
and inside that product controller i'm
going to create a public function
index which will render the list of
products
and in the index.php i'm going to
specify an array right here
and i'm going to write write product
product controller
index what does this mean
this means that whenever the url will be
slash
let's run product controllers index
action okay what we need to do here is
also that
we need to require once from the current
directory we need to require vendor
not not right here so the vendor is one
directory up
we are doing this in the public index
php so we need to go
one directory back and from the vendor
we need to
include the autoload php so that all the
autoloading is done by the composer
so next we just need to you import that
rotor so for this we can right here use
up
backslash rotor and we can do the same
thing for that app controller's product
controller
so use up controllers
product controller and i'm going to
remove this
namespace from here perfect
after this when we configure all the
roads and we're going to write a couple
of more rows right here so
when the get request is made for example
on
products slash create
we're gonna execute a
method product controller slash create
okay right here so when the
road will be products update we're going
to
execute an update
okay so we need to do like this and we
can also do an
alias of that slash so we never get
request is made on slash products
let's execute the index
and we also need to configure post
requests so whenever post request
is made on slash create we can execute
other function or we can just leave and
execute the same one
so i'm going to leave the same function
and we're going to differentiate
in the function itself whether it is a
post or get
and whenever post request is made on
update let's execute the same function
and whenever post request is made
on delete products
products slash delete let's execute
products controller delete okay
did i miss something so we have an index
gets get of create post of create
get of uh update post of update and we
have
products delete so i think i haven't
missed
anything so now we need to actually
implement that get
in post so after basically we configure
all the roads
we need to also call on the router a
method called
resolve and that result will detect
what's the current
wrote and will execute the corresponding
function
let's open no router php and create
these two functions
actually three functions should be get
and post
so one is for get which will accept url
right here
in the function second for
post which will accept url and function
as well
and third will be function resolve
which will detect what's the current
road so we need to save this given road
somewhere so i'm going to create
right here an array public
array and that's going to be
git rows which should be an array
so i'm going to configure these get
rows for the given url it's going to be
the following function and down below
i'm going to do the same thing for post
let's declare it for post as well
so post roads and down below
this post roads for the current url
it's gonna be the function
perfect so we did that and now we need
to
detect what's the current road so for
this let's
dump once again super global server
and we need to take that information
from super global
server so let's actually refresh this
and right here we see that
super global server and we're looking
for
the key where the update is there so the
request yuri
is this one and path info is the second
one
and we have php self also so we can take
that path info
or request theory but let's observe
first what happens so if i add right
here
query parameter id equals 1 for example
the inside the request you read that id
equals 1 is displayed
but not inside that path info and path
info is
exactly what we want so whenever there
is an
update we don't want that question mark
id equal something we just need the
url so in best case we should take the
path info
and make a decision based on that path
info
so let's do this so right here we're
going to take the current url
so current url will be
from the super global server to take the
path info and if path info is not
presented there let's just take this
slash
because whenever we try to access a
domain
on a root domain without any path the
path info is not presented there in the
super global server
and we can have a look as well right
here
save and refresh let's remove this
and we don't see path info so
now we have the current url and we want
to take that function
from get roads or post roads so we also
need the current method so let's search
for
method and right here we have that
request method
so let's take the method equals from the
current server
we take the request method
and right now we need to write an if
statement
so if method equals
get we need to take that function
from these get rolls
for the current url so
if the method is not get and it is post
then we need to get the function from
these
post roads for the current url
and right here we can dump that function
what is this refresh and right here we
see that the function which needs to be
executed
is up controllers product controllers
index
so if we just put right here create then
we see
an error problem on rotary php's
line 37 so let's have a look
37 right here inside the get rolls
we don't have anything anything
configured for
slash create that's obvious because we
have configured
slash products slash create so we might
have other crowds in our application
right
it might be offer orders or invoices and
that's why we need that product create
so in this case if we just try to access
a non-existing url not configured url
we should show not found to the user
right
so here we can do the following so if
for the current url there is no function
so we can put right here double question
mark if this is
set return this one if it is not set
return now
and do the same for the post roads
then we write an if statement if
function
exists let's execute that function if it
doesn't
exist let's just immediately
write page not
found okay so i'm going to move this
var down at the very top save
and refresh that and we see page not
found
which is good which is correct however
if we specify right here
products slash create we see that this
is app
controllers product controllers create
and if we go into product controller
right now and create that functions
so duplicate these four times one for
create
second for update and third for
delete and let's put enters
right here in the from the index i'm
going to
echo index page
from the create i'm going to echo create
page and from the update and delete i'm
going to do the same thing
update page
echo delete page save
and yeah this is good let's go to the
router right now
and whenever function exists we need to
execute that function
so for this i'm going to use call user
func
so which is a special function and
whenever you pass a function to that
function
it will execute this so in this case
i want to execute this fn and i'm
passing this to call user function
save it and refresh and we see create
page right here if i just remove this
and leave
this as it is i see page not found let's
just remove that slash
and i see index page if i specify update
right here i see
update page if i specify delete right
here
i see page not found probably because
we need to make a post request on the
delete
so that's totally uh fine
now what we need to do is that actually
render a create form or index
from that controller so how to do that
let's actually set up a connection to
the database so i'm going to create a
database class right here inside the app
namespace
and inside that database class i'm going
to create
constructor and inside the constructor
i'm going to create a pdo
so i'm going to actually copy and paste
couple of things from the old code so
let's go to the database and copy the
following code
and paste right here the only thing i'm
going to change is that i'm going to
make this pdo as a
class property so let's create public
pdo pdo
pdo so i'm telling that the pdo variable
pdu property is an instance of the pdo
so the type is a feature of 7.4
if you don't have php 7.4 you probably
won't be able to
not probably you won't be able to
actually write here
and you will have a syntax error so you
can also leave like this i can also
leave like this and
it will work but i'm going to specify
the pdu i really like the
typed properties of php 7.4 but right
here we're going to have an
error when we just try to make an
instance of the pdo class
because we are right now in the app name
space
and the pdo basically is the namespace
is the class name in the global
namespace so
if i just don't specify any namespace
the engine automatically
tries to find the class in the current
namespace
and this will give me an error so i just
have to specify right here
backslash which means that the pdo is an
absolute
name of that class
so i can do like this and i need to put
that
backslashes right here and right here as
well
or i can just use pdo
right here use pdo and that's it i'm
telling that i'm using a pdo
class and in the following file i just
i should be able to use it without any
namespace and prefixes
that's fine now i'm going to create this
pdo
this pdf equals new pdo and i'm going to
do the
this pdo set attribute so that's perfect
we have the database class ready and i'm
going to create a couple of
functions right here so let's create
first one to
get products get products
and right here we need to make a select
so i'm going to actually copy this as
well
from the public products index.php
let's scroll up and i'm going to
copy the following code and
paste right here so
whenever we have the pdo we're going to
use
pdo so on this video we call the prepare
we need the search keyword and we should
not get from the
super global git let's accept it as an
argument right here search
so we get the search which but we can
also specify that by default the search
is an empty string
so that we should be able to call that
get products
without that search argument we're going
to see all these things
and everything may will be will become
clear step by step
so we get the search if the search is
given we do this thing we select
with like otherwise we just select like
this and we return
all that products so now
we need to call that get products method
from the product controller from here
but
how to actually do this and we also need
to
render form okay so let's do things
step by step and let's say that i only
want to
render the form so now let's
go to that folder good folder and i'm
going to create right here views
so we are creating mvc framework mini
embassy framework
so we need views as well so inside views
i'm going to create a file for
actually let's create a folder for
products first
considering that we might have other
card applications
products inside the products i'm going
to create
a create php and let's create other
views as well
so we need index.php and we will need
update php and we will need
form as well which will be reused for
create and
update so let's create underscore form
just like this one and we will also need
to create
a layout so we will need the header and
footer
to be written in a single place and use
that
but first let's implement the rendering
of the form
so i'm going to write in each of them an
h1
tag create new product
let's go to the update php and do the
same things right here
update product let's go to
index and write
product list
now let's go to the rotor
right here and i would like to create a
method right here which will render the
view
so public function render
view and this will accept the view name
view and should render that view how the
view should be rendered
i assume that the name of the view will
be just
products so the relative path
inside that views and in this case i
should provide
if i want to render the index for
example i should provide products
slash index so right here i'm gonna
write include once
from the current directory let's go
inside views and
let's use actually double quotations
right here
let's go inside the views and then use
that
view dot php so if the view will be
products
slash index right here it will be
written products slash
index.php which will be correct
so let's just save this and we have that
render view
working and i now want to use that
render view in the product
controller so i need to somehow access
the router
right here so let's go back to the rotor
and pay attention to that call user
function
so this is the router class and rotor
executes
that function call the fn and the fn
will be this index or
create or update so whenever we execute
that
fn we can also pass an argument and
using call user function we can specify
arguments separated by comma in this
case i want to specify
router so i'm going to specify this
and i'm going to accept accept that
router
right here as a variable normal variable
and on that router i can actually
call render view and specify
products slash index
so i can also specify that the rotor
variable is
an instance of the rotor class but i
have to
import use that router right here
so if you're using phpstorm you can hit
alt and insert
hit enter and it will import the class
for us
right here or you can write this use
up router manually so
so far so good and when we render the
that view we can just return the value
uh from here or we can just leave this
as it is
inside the render view we are including
the file so this already means that it
should
render something so let's open now
index.php
not the php but the index page and right
here we see that product list
so this means that we successfully
rendered that
product index.php
however pay attention one thing if we
have a look in the
page source we see that this is just h1
it doesn't have any header and footer of
html
and thus we don't have any stylings so
we need these to be rendered inside
layout so let's go ahead and create
layout right here inside the views
i'm going to create underscore layout
and inside that's i'm going to put the
header and the footer
so i'm going to copy this from better
views partials header
so this is going to be the footer header
excuse me
right here and we can write
body in html right here and this is the
place where i want the content to be
outputted
so i'm going to output right here a
variable called content
so but the what is this content
and where does this exist the thing that
it doesn't exist yet
uh at the moment so we have to create
that content
let's go to the uh router where we
actually render
a couple of things and do the following
so first i would like to
include a content
of that view and save it in a content
variable
so if somehow i managed to save the
content of
the view file in a content variable then
i can include
the layout.php and if i have a content
variable already declared
the layout will simply use that content
variable and
just print it correctly right so
how i can do this when i include
something it automatically sends the
output to the browser
but we need this in a variable for this
in php there exists
output caching methods and
we need to call upstart which means that
i want to start caching of the output
and basically every statement which
sends an output like echo or include
or anything it will be just saved in a
buffer local buffer it won't be sent to
the browser
and in this case we include the file
that will be saved in a buffer
and now i'm going to call a method ob
get clean which returns that output
and cleans that buffer so i'm going to
save this in a content variable now
so this is basically what i wanted now i
have
a value html of that view file
in a content and now i can
include from the current directory
i can include that layout.php and
because the layout.php needs content
i also have a content variable created
right here
and that should render it properly so
let's save and have a look in the
browser
and here we see so we have header we
have footer and inside
we have product list that's perfect
we can have a look right here as well so
fine
now let's actually do the following in
the product controller
let's use the database which we just
created
that function get products to get all
the products
and pass it down to the view
so this is what we need to do but how
can i access an
instance of the database it is not even
created yet
so let's go to the router and i'm going
to create an
instance of the database right here so
let's create constructor
and let's create also public property
database which i'm going to call
and db and now
this db equals new
database and this is the database which
stabilizes establishes the connection to
the mysql
so now in the product controller i can
access the db
in the following way router
slash arrow db not slash
arrow db and the db has a method
get products and optionally i can
specify
search but i'm going to do without
search right now so that should give me
all products i want from the database
and i also want to pass this to the view
but first let's see what
this product's variable is actually so
save and refresh and right here we see
eight
products and each of them is an
associative array
and this is exactly what we want right
so let's pass
this to the view and i want this to be
passed as an associative area
so the products key corresponds
to the products variable
so the render view does not accept
parameters yet
so we have to go and configure that
parameters
let's delete that comment right here i'm
going to specify params
which by default is an empty array so if
we don't want to pass anything
so it will be an empty array by default
and now
i'm going to pass that and make it
available inside the view
so whenever i open that create php
and i dump right here
that products i should be able to see
and i even want to iterate over these
products
and render them so how to do that
so pay attention and from products
controller i am passing an associative
area where products key corresponds to
products a variable now inside
a rotor php i'm going to iterate
over the params and i'm going to iterate
as a key value here because it is an
associative array and i'm going to do
the following thing so i write key
and this key is basically string value
right so we pass products as a key
and this will be key string products
so i can put another dollar sign
in front of that key dollar sign key
pay attention to this which means that
it will
create a products variable
so this is a product string i'm going to
put dollar sign in front of that which
will create a products
variable and now this products variable
equals to value which is
what is passed from the controller so
zoom out and here we have using this
approach
we created products variable and because
we are including that
create php or anything what we want in
our case because we pass
right here products variable for the
products index
actually we should do this in the index
right here so we should be able to
see the result of that for dump so let's
go to the product controller no
let's go to the rotor and yeah exactly
everything
works fine so now let's open the browser
and refresh
that and we see product list and the
list what we
what we want so now let's copy
s couple of code from that um
where it is public products index.php
that's also the disadvantage of that
that structure so you cannot
really understand where the code is
so let's actually take the table let's
let's take with the search form
and everything basically the create
button itself
so take this everything including the
table
go to the products index
and paste right here so perfect
so we have that products and we also
need that search variable which we don't
have
but let's actually have a look without
that
so refresh and inside the search we have
an error that undefined variable search
but we actually see that products list
exactly as we want so images are not
there but we're going to fix that
and css i think is not included also so
let's
copy from public up css
into our public
up css and we should see
so here it is is for this search it is
very easy
let's open product controller and
right here create a search variable
which equals
to take out the search from super global
get
if there is no search in the super
global get
let's take the empty string and we can
pass
that search also in the get products to
filter products
properly and we can pass that search
to the as a param of the view
and now the search variable will be
created
inside that index.php right
right here actually i'm going to close
that
i don't want so here we have
let's refresh in the browser and the
error basically disappears
and even the filtering should work if i
just type test
it filters and shows only products which
contains test right there
so let's also move images from that
better folder let's go to
public paste right here so
we have that images
let's refresh it and here we see the
images
now let's implement update uh create
update and delete so when i click that
create product i have the following
error
so we just need to change this let's go
to the product index right here and i'm
going to specify
slash products slash
create is the url we want to access
so go back refresh click that create and
we see that create page
we have to of course create an actual
form let's go to the product controller
scroll down and we're gonna render that
view so i'm gonna
copy this paste right here and render
products create and let's accept
rotor as an argument right here we don't
want any parameters to be passed isn't
it
so if we just open the better version
if we just go to public
products create and then we include
right here
form does the form need so it needs
product
for update and it also
uses i think the title description and
price
okay so let's first take this whole form
including errors
and paste these
in our create we use products create
right here
so we have a couple of variables we have
errors
we have product and we have title
description and price so i'm going to
change this
in the following way so in the product
controller
right here i'm going to create a product
variable
which will be an associative array and
this will contain itself
title as an empty string
description
image and price so here we have
image and here we have price and we're
going to also describe right here
errors as an empty array and we just
need to pass that errors and products
right here as a view parameters
so now let's just pass a single product
right here
and errors so here we have that
errors and product
all right let's now open that
create and have a look so
we have an undefined variable title and
description that's logical
so let's go to the product and right
here we are using the title and
description but we're going to change
this into
product title
and product
description so we should also have
product price
save and refresh
so this looks good and now whenever we
fill the form
and hit the submit it's the code will
come right here
so we just need to handle the uh
code properly for submitting the data
for this i'm going to write an if
statement so if
superglobal servers request method
equals post we have to actually
save it in the database so for this i'm
going to
create a product model so let's go to
uh in our good folder and i'm going to
create
models folder right here and
inside that models folder i'm going to
create
product class which will have a
namespace
up backslash models
so let's say this that that product
class basically
will be a mapping of the class
into a database table so this will have
properties which will be columns in the
database
so public for example integer id
which by default will be null and we
need to also put a question mark right
here which indicates that the
id property can be optional
it can be actually null so if i just
don't specify that question mark
we're gonna have an error that the id
must be an integer but you can't assign
now to it
so when i put question mark it means
that i can assign null to it
so we have to specify uh public
string which will be the title of the
product
okay we can set this to null as well and
duplicate this couple of times
we need public string property for
description
and we need that property for
price but it should not be string it
should be float
we need also image path
so image path that's going to be a
string
and basically every each of them can be
null right we need question mark right
here
and i'm going to create one more
property which will be an
array and that's going to be the
uploaded file
so which we're going to pass so that's
going to be
image file so just like this one and
that can also be
be optional so now what we need to do
that i'm going to create right here
inside the product class
a public function load which will accept
the data
and assuming that the data contains all
the necessary information
we're going to take out data um from
that variable data
and assign it to the properties of the
class so
for example this id equals
data id but if the id doesn't exist
inside the data
let's assign now this
title equals data
title and we know that the title is
required so i'm not going to write
the double question mark null right here
so we need
this description equals
data description and i'm going to write
here
also question mark question mark an
empty string
and this price
equals data price
okay and price is also required and what
else so we have this
image file also equals
from the data to accept image file but
that
can also be um optional and if it is not
provided let's just
assume it is a null and then this
image path image path equals
data image and if that doesn't exist we
can also
assume that this is now perfect so we
make the data loading
and we need to load data from the
product controller
so right here in the product controller
we get the data from the post so
what we need to do is that
a sign that products uh title product
description the post data assigned back
to into product
title description and image and we also
have to create an instance of the
product
so i'm gonna do the following so i'm
going to rename this product variable
into
products that should be
oops so that should be product
data and then i'm going to write product
data
title equals from the super global post
to take the title and repeat this for
description as well
and price
and for image file as well
so image file product data image file
equals from the files
super global to take out the image and
if the image is not presented let's take
out the null
so now we just need to create an
instance of the product which
we just created uh of the product class
which we just created
so product
okay just like this and i'm gonna call
on the products
instance load method and pass the
product data
so i basically load everything what i
have right now
inside that product model and now i
should be able to call
simply product save on the
product model and we have to implement
that save
and if save is done then we have to
redirect user to
the index page so that should be slash
oops that should be slash products just
like this
and we can exit right here as well so
let's
implement that save so for this
let's go to the product and down below
i'm going to create
function save and let's declare an
area of errors right here
errors and let's do the validation
so if this title doesn't exist
so we know that we loaded the data into
these
properties okay this title this
description and so on
so if this title doesn't exist inside
the errors
we just add uh product
title is required
so next thing is if
this price is not provided
we just write inside the errors
a product price
is required and
so we also need to uh actually we need
to have a look at the old logic right
here so
that's going to be inside validate
product so here we have
the validation then we need also to
create the
public directory and then upload the
image
so let's just take this code and modify
so here we have to create
uh the directory but let's fix the path
so we are in the products
in the product model so we need to go
one directory back
from the product model and go
inside the public and create there okay
so the next is to if there is name there
are no errors let's just copy the
following code
and paste right here and fix everything
what needs to be fixed
so the image basically is
this image file so we don't want to
create that image variable instead
where we use the image variable we can
change this
into this image file so
that's going to be this image
file so when we don't want that image
also the image path is
this image path so right here right here
we need to use this image
path in this way so
we delete this one and
now we need to use so this basically is
an if statement which checks if the
product is in update phase
and if the image basically is already
there
we need to just delete that image so for
this we need to write
if this image path exists
okay let's just delete
this image path this
image path but we need to fix that
directories as well
call one directory pack right here
go one directory back right here and
right here so
and we need this image path right here
as well
so let's have a look so we obviously
don't have that
random string and we need that function
but except that i think everything looks
good
and what we can also do return
errors from that save so let's just take
the errors
and return from here so that we can use
that errors
from the inside the controller so
if we go in the controller and that
product save now
returns errors so errors
and we just write an if statement so if
errors is empty it means that
everything worked perfectly and we can
redirect user to the
index otherwise the errors will be
basically passed down
to the render view and it will be
rendered
so let's see how this works
inside create php we do display
errors so this should actually work
perfectly so let's refresh and just hit
the submit
and we have very first error right here
typed property price
must be float or null and string used
that's obvious because right here from
the product controller
everything basically taken out from that
is
a string so we can cast this
into float float
in this way so save and refresh
and here we have it so we have the
product title is required
product price is required but for some
reason
we don't have product title and product
price right here
so let's see why this happens so we take
the product data
and pass it down right here so let's
just print what's the product data
a refresh and this is the product data
which doesn't contain anything
obviously we haven't passed anything and
that's the reason so let's just write
something
some cool title hit the enter
and the title contains that and it is
populated so if i just remove the title
and put some price hit the enter the
price is there
but the title is not there so if i just
put the title as well
test five hit the enter
okay something
went wrong yeah basically everything
went smoothly except one thing so the
validation
worked so we did saving
but we haven't actually saved that in
the database
so we need to do this as well and let's
implement this method in the database
php let's go to the database
and right here down below i'm going to
create a function
save product and we accept
right here uh product
actually we can create separate methods
for
save product and update product or
we can do just once so
let's call this create product and
create separate
methods for them so we have that create
product
and that accepts an instance of the
so i'm going to copy this script copy
and paste
from the public products create
scroll at the top right here we have
that so
copy and paste
right here and we need this pdo
prepare insert into products everything
looks good
except that we need to provide right
here product title
product image path product description
and product price
so let's use the multiple cursor product
oops product title and everything like
this
okay fine so that should actually
already make a
record in the database let's go to the
product and after we actually save this
in the
database we need to call right here
we need to get the database instance and
we need to call
create product on that but how to get
the database instance
so we can actually access the database
instance
through router right here but we don't
have even router right here in the
product
so what to do in the database we can
create a static property right here
so we know that the database instance is
a singleton
object and that singleton object
is an object which um a singleton object
is an object
which exists only one instance of that
class
so this is the singleton and we don't
have two instances of the database class
right
so we need to access that singleton
through the static property so
i'm going to create public static
database db right here
and inside the constructor whenever we
create this pdo after this
i'm going to call self as a static
identifier self db
equals this
so the instance basically is saved
inside the static property db
now in the product i can access
database and db in this way and let's
save it in a db variable and now i'm
going to check
if the current product this product has
id
this means that we have to update so i'm
going to call on db
update product which doesn't exist yet
but we're going to create
and i'm going to pass this right there
however if it doesn't have id
then i can call create product and
pass this so that should already work
and create
product for us let's go to the product
page
test five the description
the price hit the enter and we see this
test five however we haven't uploaded
image
and it's it also doesn't display
it properly we're going to get back to
that image
or let's check immediately right here so
why
it's there it's not there so okay so the
image basically is
empty string and it should not be even
displayed
right here what is displayed so
slash is displayed right here okay so
this image tag should not be displayed
let's have a look in the index.php
and scroll down okay
and we need an if statement so
php if product image
exists let's display this image tag
otherwise we don't do anything and we
call and if
save and refresh and we just don't see
an image
okay looks good and let's try
one with image uploading
choose an image test 6
test with some description hit the enter
and here we have a problem
that's about calling a random string so
we don't have that
random string function and what we can
do
is that we can create that functions.php
right here in the good folder
and just require once just like we are
requiring
autoload right here or we can create
we can do with a more object-oriented
fashion
and i'm going to create right here
helpers
helpers folder and i'm going to create
there
um probably a string helper okay
string helper uh that shouldn't be a
folder maybe
that should be class string helper that
should be
up backslash helpers this is going to be
the namespace
or let's just call it utilityhelper so
util helper
okay hit the enter that util helper is
created
i'm going to delete that string helper
folder and inside that util
helper i'm going to create that function
so
let's just take this
and paste right here just i'm going to
make this
public static function random string
so now in the product i can just call
util helper column column a random
string as a static function
and that should work let's just save and
reload
and here we see the product with the
image
okay what we just assigned now let's see
how we can do
delete and update so let's do delete
first
it's it's easy let's go to the product
controller scroll down
and right here uh we need to accept
first
rotor okay
on the rotor we need to access to
db and on the database i would just want
to call
delete product so delete
product and pass their id let's get the
id
using method post so id equals
from the super global post let's take
the id
if the id is not presented there let's
take the null
and if that id doesn't exist
let's redirect user header
to the location
column slash products
okay exit right here and in the delete
product i'm going to pass
that id and we need to implement that
delete product
and whenever the delete product
basically happens we also need to
redirect
user to the products so i'm going to put
this right here as well
and let's go to the database
and implement that delete product right
here
public function delete product it
accepts an
id and we just need to deal it so i'm
going to
copy and paste this from public products
delete php these three lines
perfect paste this right here
these pdo so
everything should work that you delete
the product
and redirect user to the products list
so let's have a look refresh and let's
delete a couple of
others and here we have the problem so
we just need to fix
that views products
creates not the create but we want index
so we just need to fix the
path right here so it should be
submitted on slash
products slash delete right here
and we should pass that id as a
hidden input so that should work let's
go
back and refresh and just click on the
test product okay it was
successfully deleted okay perfect and we
need to
fix right now the update so slash
products slash update so i'm writing
here slash
products which basically means that
after the domain
i want to this to be the road
so let's remove the dot php so it should
be slash
products slash update after the domain
so that's good so let's just save the
file refresh and
hit the edit and we see that update page
now let's go to the product controller
and
accept a router right here
router that should be a router variable
and we get right here an id from
super global get if that id doesn't
exist
we take now
if the id exists more specifically if
the id doesn't exist
we redirect user to the products page
let's do this however if the id
exists we either need to render
or we need to update okay
so first of all we need to select
so the product product data
equals rotor
db get product
by id which doesn't exist yet so we have
to create that
so when we create uh we can already
render the view
router render
render view pass their products
slash update and pass
write their product to be
product product data so
let's implement that get product pid in
the database
so i'm gonna do this at the top right
here
public function get product by id we
accept the id
and we just want to select it so i'm
gonna do this
in the update php not here but
right here at the top where it is
this is the code we are looking for
uh that should be written
right here so that should be this
pdo
prepare okay
and finally we just need to return that
product
so this looks
good now let's actually open
that form update right here
and we just need to include the form
just like
we are doing but we're doing this in the
create php so that should move that
form should move inside the form
so right here i'm going to put that form
and i'm going to include
that form right here
and i'm going to do the same thing in
the update because we need the same form
so let's go to the update and include
that form right here and
let's have a look refresh and this is
our product page
so let's go back so we need that go back
button let's
copy this from the create we don't even
have on the create
so let's just open that
and paste right here
and on update as well
refresh go back to products and we need
to change these to be
products just like this refresh go back
to products
edit another one and we see all the
information
filled up go back to galaxy
and i don't see description is that
because we don't have
no we have the description so now let's
do the actual updating of the item
and i think we are done so let's click
the edit
and whenever we change something the
form will be submitted in the product
controller
and that should be the place so right
here i'm going to write
if the server
request method will be
post what we need to do is
that just populate
title description price and image file
inside the product data so that should
be
product excuse me that should be title
actually we can copy this from the
create
so these four lines so we just copy this
paste right here
then we create an instance of the
product basically we need the same thing
right here as well
okay paste right here and if that
returns error
if that doesn't return error we redirect
to the index
otherwise we just display errors and we
need errors
to be used right here as well
so here we have that errors
and let's describe the errors at the
top as well so if for some reason
i open the edit form i remove the title
and hit the enter
i should see that product title is
required okay
galaxy note 20 i'm gonna hit the enter
and let's see what happens update
product doesn't exist
obviously yes because in the product we
have written right here update product
which is not actually
implemented let's go to the database php
and i'm going to create
update product which will accept an
instance
of the product as product
and let's open um
update right here scroll down and
copy the following code
and paste this right here so
this pdo
and we prepare and we we do everything
as we we're doing
just right here we need to specify this
uh the product title
product image path description
everything like this so i'm going to
copy and paste
this right here and it should be
product id okay
let's just save this and refresh
and let's just try
so updated hit the enter
and here we see that's updated so this
actually works
so we have implemented everything
basically
and now let's have a look at the source
code how it looks and compared to the
old one
so right here we have that structure
controllers
helpers models public vendor which is
uh right now we don't have any
third-party packages but if we need the
third-party packages
this will go inside the inside the
vendor and inside the controller this is
a product controller which contains
all the logic regarding the product
so we can see them as separate methods
and we can even collapse couple of other
methods and focus
on the other one which we are interested
for example on delete
and collapse everything and the code
will be
much more readable and visible
in the views we have separated
inside the creating update all of them
basically are very clean
very minimalistic the most logic is
inside the form
and inside the index.php but that's just
a table in the form nothing else but the
big advantage is that so we splitted
that logic across multiple files and we
have
like the single responsibility principle
which means that the database class
right here is responsible to set up a
connection to the database
and update product or delete the product
or create the product and the product
php itself a model
is responsible to make the validation
properly
and return the validation errors and
save the
uploaded images and controller is
responsible
to connect the data
like for example right here the products
uh data
inside the view so we have a full
embassy so it's again it's
like the minimalistic mvc we don't have
all the great features the current
frameworks have
but we have models views and controllers
all of them and our crowd application in
my opinion
is much more like advanced and much more
like perfect than it was in better or
in bed examples again this is not
probably the best version but
it's much better than we had before and
it's not best version because
again i will highlight that if you want
best version probably
you should think about using today's
modern popular frameworks like
laravel symphony e2 and
others now let's create
apache virtual host and make our
application working on the following
domain
products dot test so whenever we type
this in url
we should see our products crowd
application
for this we need to go to the exam
installation directory
go to apache conf
extra and we're going to open httpd
vhosts.com file
so i'm going to open this and this is
the file which contains
all the virtual hosts on on our
example installation and down below
if we scroll down below we should see
virtual host
text so it looks like unlike the xml
or html text so and right here
we just need to create new virtual host
i'm going to copy and paste this
and we don't need all the properties
right here
i'm just going to leave document root i
don't want server admin
we need document root we need
server name and i don't even need error
login custom log
so i'm gonna remove the comments
right here and the only thing we need is
that htdocs directory to be configured
properly okay so in this case we need to
specify right here
the folder inside which the index.php
file
is and which should be the entry script
so if we just
open our xampp directory
go to htdocs php crash course let's go
to product squad go to the good solution
in public so this is the directory
basically
which should be served for that virtual
host
so i'm going to paste this directory
right here
and for the virtual host i'm going to
name it
product squad products
dot test okay that should be the virtual
host name
and right here we also need to specify
the directory tag
so i'm going to copy and paste the
following directory tag
and explain everything okay so this is
the directory tag
so we specified the same
same path right here inside the
directory and for that directory
we enable a rewrite engine which means
that
everything what is not a file or it is
not a directory
redirect to index.php so index.php
will handle all the requests if the
request is not made
for the file and for the directory
so now let's go to
windows folder on the c
drive windows let's find
system 32 folder
right here we need drivers
etc and we need to open hosts
file and we need to make a one change
right here
to make this virtual host working so we
need to write
that whenever we ask for
products dot test domain
we should serve from a local ip address
which is
a hundred and twenty seven zero zero
okay that should be the ip let's just
save this so we cannot save until we
retry this as admin i'm going to click
that button
it will make a neat couple of seconds
yes and
the file was actually saved but because
we changed the virtual host file
we need to restart apache so let's go to
the xampp installation
go to actually scroll down
and open exam control
stop this we need to
accept that
and start it
[Music]
so after this let's just check if that
domain
works fine so we refresh
and here is our products credit
application
up and running on that domain however
we made some bug while we were
developing
and i didn't tell you about this and
now it's time to fix that back so now if
i just
click on create product i still stay
on the product list page the url
basically changes but
i'm still on the product list page and
why does this happen let's have a look
in the source code
so the bug basically is inside
rotor php so right here
when we take the current url from the
path
info that path info only exists
when we start php's built-in server so
if we start
the application working using apache's
virtual host
in this case this actually doesn't work
and that's why we have that problem
so to fix this we need to change
how we actually get the current url so
again let's dump right here what's the
current
super global server and exit right here
and have a look refresh and this is
so let's search for products slash
create
products slash create
and down below we have that
a redirect url and we don't actually
have that path info as i mentioned
so we need to take that from the redec
redirect url
however there is one thing to notice
so if we just specify right here query
parameters for example
id corresponds to something
in this case a redirect url
contains where is that
not the redirect url it's my bed so we
want
to um let's search for
products how it is called
products request yuri so this is what
we're looking for
so request yuri and if we just specify
right here
id equals to some number
in this case this request yuri contains
that id as well
so it's right here request yuri so we
just need to extract the
products slash create and just
take that before the question mark to
make this working
okay so let's go to the source code
and take request yuri
and if it doesn't exist we take this
slash however
we need right here to take that to take
the substring
from zero position until the question
mark
okay so we just write if
uh str pose inside
that current url of the question mark
is not false which means that if
question mark if the current url
contains the question mark
in this case the current url should
become
substring of the current url
from zero position to the position
of the question mark okay which is the
str pose current url
of question mark okay so let's have a
look at that
current url and exit right here
and we don't want exit oops
right at the top so let's just save and
refresh
and that's the products create so even
though we have the question mark right
here
we took it correctly so let's just
remove this refresh
and we have slash right now so if i just
remove this
exit and we updated the current url save
that
and refresh we see list if i click
create product
i am redirected to the create new
product page
and this will work fine so we just set
up the
apache virtual hosts
okay let's talk about now sessions and
cookies
sessions and cookies both are technique
to save
some data for that specific user who is
accessing the browser
but there is one big difference between
sessions and cookies
so if you want to save data inside
session
the data is saved on the server side
however if you want to save data in
cookies that data is
saved on the client side and it
the data basically is passed to every
request and response
and using that cookies data server and
client
can communicate to each other let's
start
a session in php so
i'm going to use a function session
start
session underscore start
and now let's open sessions and cookies
page counter okay and i'm going to
inspect the page
and let's have a look in the application
cookies area okay let me enlarge this
so right here we see php sesh
id whenever we start session from the
php this basically creates that session
id
so because we called that session start
it created that session id
and saved inside cookie basically server
told the browser okay so let's start
communication
with each other and i'm going to give
you that unique identifier php session
id
this random string and whenever next
time you want to make requests to
me so basically send the following
session id so that i know
who you are so if we have a look in the
network and if i just refresh the page
right here the client makes requests on
that page counter
right so if i go in the headers
uh no in the cookies area right here we
see that the following cookies are
passed and based on that session id
server can understand that hey this is
the same user
who made a request like several seconds
ago
so i just need to do something which is
relevant to that user
so sessions very often are used to save
like the
user information the user id or username
or
things like that so let's actually
implement a
page counter okay so i want to track
how many visits the user made on that
page
and then if the user for example visited
10 times or 100 times i'm gonna like
show some
present for that user so this is just a
sample sample mini
mini project okay how to do this
first of all i'm going to show you also
that that session id can be used
in the code as well okay so i'm going to
print right here
[Music]
session underscore id
okay and this is this same idea which is
written in the cookie so i'm going to
refresh the page
and right here we we see that q0b
something if you go in the application
we see the exact same one
so if i just delete that value from
cookie and refresh the page
this server basically will see that
there is no
session id in cookie so it will create
new one
okay and right here we see the new one
and right here as well
okay let's see how we can set some
things in a cookie
so for this we need to use super global
variable
underscore session and that session is
associative array
and i can pass some values right here i
can write
name equals zura
and then i can dump the whole session
not server but session save that
and refresh and right here we see name
equals zura right now even if i remove
that name equals zura
save it and refresh i still
see that name equals zura so that's
because
once it is saved in the session it is
not deleted
until we delete that session id and lost
the connection between the client
and the and the server or we just
manually remove that value okay perfect
so if i want to manually remove that
value from the session i'm going to run
unset i'm going to pass session
name so let's remove whatever is written
inside
session name so i just
save that and refresh the page and on
second refresh it basically disappears
or i can run a method session unset
session unset which basically removes
all the values from session
so let's create that page counter i told
you
so i'm going to write here so let's
remove the session id
i'm going to write here inside the
session
for page counter i'm going to do the
following so
if inside this session page counter
already exists
and for the first execution we know for
sure that it won't exist
okay so if it won't exist let's take
zero
but if the page counter exists inside
the session
let's leave whatever is there and after
this
i'm gonna increase the page counter by
one
page counter plus plus so on the first
visit
this doesn't exist so zero will be
assigned to page counter and it will be
increased and will become
one on the next visit page counter will
exist
inside this session and it will be just
increased
so i should also tell you that you
should run
session start as a very first thing in
your application so you shouldn't output
your html or do anything else
except like running session start
so when i do this then we need to check
if session page counter
reaches 10
we do the following so we can output
something
thanks for visiting
us 10 times
and we can also unset
everything from session and we can even
destroy the session
session destroy okay so session onset
basically
removes all the values from the session
but it doesn't destroy the session so
you can still set some values
after session and set so i can run here
session test corresponds to something so
session and set just removes but i can
still write values there
for uh if i just run session destroy
it is impossible after session destroy
to set
some values inside the session okay
so i save this and i refresh the page
and let's also print how many times i
visited so
down below i'm going to write
my awesome page comma
visited php equal
session page counter
[Music]
times save and refresh
and look at this so visit it two times
i'm going to keep
refreshing and this that one increases
so if i just delete that session id
this means that now server doesn't know
who the client is
so the client is new for uh for it for
server
and in in this case the page counter
will be just not set
and it will take zero okay so refresh
and now i visited the very first time
second three
four five six seven eight nine and ten
and right here so we see the following
so thanks for visiting 10 times but
because we
unset the session we actually don't
see that page counter anymore
so what we can do is that just remove
this
page counter and have a variable right
here
page counter equals
0 for example and before we call onset
we take that page counter from the
session
and save it in a variable and use that
variable
down below so that is necessary because
whenever we call onset
the values from the session is destroyed
and we cannot use session counter
anymore
so we just save that and refresh
and here we see visited zero times
and let's see what's going on
uh okay that should not be declared
right here
so we should do probably something like
this so
page counter equals if from the session
page counter exists let's take otherwise
let's take zero so
save and refresh and here we see three
four five
six seven eight nine ten and we see that
thanks for visiting
us ten times perfect if i just refresh
it starts from one again so very often
sessions are used with cookies
and this is the example so let's move on
and talk about cookies
so i'm going to open on the left side
second file
cookies php and on the
right side as well so cookies are
absolutely useful in today's
programming in today's web development
and cookies are used mainly
for three reasons personalization
session management and tracking
so what do i mean by personalization so
you have probably met that when you
access amazon.com
and you just start browsing the latest
dell laptops for example and even
though that you are not authorized you
are just a guest user open it in
like a different browser and you just
start browsing
just having a look at the dell laptops
later when you open the amazon it
suggests you a couple of dell laptops
so that basically happens through
cookies so whatever
item you visit amazon sales that
information inside the cookie
and the cookie is saved in your browser
and next time when you access the same
website
it takes the values from the cookies
tells this sends
it to the server and server understands
what
products you have seen before and based
on that information it suggests you
new items okay another example of using
a cookie
is google analytics so which
tracks how many pages you visited which
pages you visit it has also a
possibility to
keep track which buttons you clicked and
so on and these kind of things
are done using cookies and the third one
is session management in the
this is the perfect example which uh i
showed
to you about sessions um so sessions are
basically very often used with cookies
and yeah php sesh id is saved in the
cookies
okay let's see how we can create values
in cookies
or delete or update that values so for
this we have a
function set cookie and that's it cookie
accepts couple of arguments right here
first argument is the name so we can
pass any string right here some key
and the second argument is the value we
can pass some value
right here the third argument is
basically
the expiration date so when
that cookie value should expire
and i'm going to specify right here now
and
current time plus
for example 60 seconds so this cookie
value
should expire in 60 seconds from now
so there are a couple of other arguments
but i'm not going to explain them
so when i save this and refresh and
let's inspect the page and go in
application cookies right here
we see that key corresponds to value
so that php id basically is left
because we previously accessed the
sessions page
so if i just delete both of them refresh
the page
it will create that key value okay which
will have the expiration date the
following date
okay what if i want to update the value
so for this i'm going to use the same
function
set cookie i'm going to specify the same
key
by different value value updated for
example
and if you want we can specify also
different
expiration date for example after one
hour excuse me okay just like this
save and refresh and right here we see
value updated and if we have a look
in the requests in the network refresh
and click on this if we go in the
cookies
we see right here that these are request
which are sent to the server and these
are response cookies which
are sent from the server so
this is how this actually works
so the cookies are exchanged between
client and the server so the server can
write cookies client can write cookies
you can write cookies using javascript
as well
okay and let's see how we can actually
remove the cookie
for this we just need to specify
we we need to pass the same key the
value basically does not matter
but we need to specify uh past
time so current time minus
one for example which is the past time
so if i just save this
and refresh it go to the application we
don't see that cookie value anymore
and if i go in the network right here we
passed the cookie
from in the request this was the cookie
and in the response it deleted that
cookie
the latest record so if i just refresh
these
and click on this so basically request
cookies does not exist i didn't pass any
cookie because there was nothing written
there
but the server just had returned with a
deleted cookie so
these basically occur all of them so
sarah just
set the cookie value and then updated
that value
and then deleted that value so if i just
do like this so set cookie
refresh the page refresh once again and
the request cookie contains this one
so now i'm gonna delete that set cookie
and
only delete the cookie so save and
refresh and right here we see that we
passed that value but server basically
deleted that
that cookie and we don't see that in the
application as well so if i just
uncomment this comment of this save
and refresh so no cookies
let's go to the network no cookies were
passed or received
that's that's all basically about
cookies and sessions
that's all guys and thanks for watching
i hope you enjoyed and if so hit the
like button
and share this video if you want more
php tutorials and challenges
check out my channel thanks for watching
and see you in the next time